The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Dr. Vinod Vidwans 
Professor and Chair 
School of Fine and Performing Arts 
FLAME University 
Pune, India 
©Dr. Vinod Vidwans, 2016
Monograph No.: FUM-2016-002 
Title: The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
First Edition: January 26, 2016 
ISBN: 978-81-929251-4-1 
Published by: 
FLAME University, Pune
Campus Address: 
Gat No. 1270, Lavale 
Off Pune-Bangalore Highway 
Pune- 412115, India
Mailing address: 
401, Phoenix Complex 
Bund Garden Road 
Opp. Residency Club 
Pune 411001, India 
E-mail: enquiry@flame.edu.in 
Website: www.flame.edu.in 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the author. 
Author: 
Dr. Vinod Vidwans, 
FLAME University, Pune 
E-mail - vinodvidwans@gmail.com
vidwans@flame.edu.in 
Website: http://www.computationalmusic.com/
 
Dedicated to Bharatmuni
-The proponent of Shruti-Nidarshanam or Sarana-Chatushtaya experiment 
which is the first ever systematic exposition of 22 shrutis (microtones) in 
Indian Music. 
Acknowledgements 
I am grateful to FLAME University for publishing this monograph. 
Especially, I would like to thank Vice Chancellor, Dr. Devi Singh and the 
members of the Deans’ Committee, Prof. D. S. Rao, Prof. Rajneesh Krishna, 
and Prof. Santosh Kudtarkar for encouraging the research. I feel fortunate 
to get such encouragement and support from my colleagues as the
concept of shrutis in Indian Classical Music is highly complex. 
I would like to thank Dr. Kiran Thakur for constantly discussing the 
progress of the research. It kept me on track and helped me complete it. 
Finally, my family needs to be mentioned although they are beyond 
formality. Any research that I have done so far has not escaped the critical 
eye of my wife Archana. She not only edited the final draft, but also 
discussed some of the critical research issues and provided some valuable 
suggestions. I also appreciate my son Vihang’s curiosity about highly 
technical research topic such as Shruti (microtones) in Indian Music. 
Dr. Vinod Vidwans 
 
Contents
From the Vice Chancellor’s Desk ................................................................. i
About the Monograph .................................................................................... iii
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 1
1.1 A Brief Overview of the Rhetoric on Shruti ....................................... 2
1.2 The Modern Debate ..................................................................................... 5
2. ANCIENT LITERATURE ON SHRUTI ..................................................... 9
3. VEDIC CONCEPT OF SHRUTI/ SWARA .............................................. 13
4. SHRUTI IN NARADIYA SHIKSHA ........................................................... 23
4.1 Definition of Shruti .................................................................................... 26
4.2 Characterizing Shruti ............................................................................... 28
5. SHRUTI IN NATYASHASTRA OF BHARATA ...................................... 43
5.1 Swara Sthapana (Establishing Musical notes) .............................. 46
5.2 Grama Sthapana (Establishing Scales) ............................................. 56
5.3 Pramana Shruti (Establishing Standard Shruti) ........................... 59
5.4 Shruti-Nidarshanam (Demonstrating Microtones) ..................... 62
5.5 Shruti-Nidarshanam on Veena: Demonstrating Shrutis on 
Veena ....................................................................................................................... 68
6. SHRUTI ACCORDING TO SANGITA RATNAKARA ........................... 71
6.1 Shruti and Swara-Sthapana (Establishing microtones and 
musical notes on Veena)................................................................................. 72
6.2 Shruti-Nidarshanam According to Sangita Ratnakara .............. 74
6.3 Integrating Shrutis of Naradiya Shiksha into Bharata’s 
Paradigm ............................................................................................................... 76
7. COMPUTING AND RECONSTRUCTING SHRUTIS .......................... 85
7.1 Music as a Psycho-acoustic phenomenon ....................................... 85
7.2 Simulating Shrutis ...................................................................................... 90
7.3 Comparative Facts: Bharata’s Shrutis and Contemporary 
Practices ................................................................................................................ 93
8. A COMPREHENSIVE FRAME-WORK .................................................. 99
8.1 `Shruti Punja’ or `Shruti Megha’ Model (A cluster or cloud 
of microtones) .................................................................................................... 99
8.2 Analysis and Discussion ....................................................................... 114
9. CONCLUSIONS .......................................................................................... 123
Appendix ......................................................................................................... 125
Shruti Harmonium Key-Board ................................................................... 125
References ...................................................................................................... 129
I 
From the Vice Chancellor’s Desk 
I am glad that FLAME University embarked on the second phase of its 
research publications program with the release of a series of monographs. 
It is noteworthy that this monograph and few other books are being 
released for publication within six months after FLAME University came 
into being. 
The mission of FLAME University includes offering a platform for research 
in all fields of learning. We encourage faculty and students to undertake 
original, theoretical, and applied research that is relevant to society. Our 
teachers participate in national and international conferences to present 
their research papers. Our endeavor is to take their research into the 
public domain so that researchers, scholars and laypersons can benefit 
from the findings of their studies. This publication is the logical extension 
of this mission. 
The present monograph titled `The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music’, 
authored by Dr. Vinod Vidwans demonstrates that FLAME University 
researchers are keen to take up research on Indian themes and concerns. 
This monograph tries to throw light on the doctrine of microtones in 
Indian classical music and their relevance today. 
My compliments to Dr. Vinod Vidwans for writing this monograph.
Dr. Devi Singh 
January 26, 2016 
 
II 
III 
About the Monograph 
Monograph is an extended essay dedicated to a single topic. It gives 
comprehensive information about the topic in terms of the significance of 
the topic in the context of particular field, historical or evolutionary 
development of the topic, technical and updated information and finally 
the future prospects. This monograph is dedicated to the single topic of 
`shruti’ (microtone) in Indian music. Although it does not discuss the 
concept of shruti from evolutionary point of view and historical 
perspective in strict sense, it does not shy away from it either. Focus is 
more on conceptual understanding of all the relevant issues related to 
shruti and their significance and relevance in today’s context while 
historicity is secondary. The doctrine of shruti in Indian music has been 
discussed and debated for at least two thousand years. The debate has 
become livelier during last two centuries after Western musicologists 
such as William Jones started taking keen interest in it. For almost last two 
decades the topic is being studied using scientific and technological tools. 
It is interesting to see that the topic of shruti in Indian music is highly 
revered and respected but still remained an enigma for practicing 
musicians, scholars and musicologists. 
This monograph is written for Indian musicologists, researchers, scholars 
of Indian music, and Information Technology (IT) professionals who have 
strong inclination towards Indian music. The implied readership is highly 
diverse and well-informed about Indian music. It is certain that this 
monograph is not for a beginner in Indian music. The theoretical concepts 
discussed in this monograph are highly complex and require deeper level 
understanding of Indian music. The discussion involves conceptual 
analysis and at times rigorous technical analysis. The author of this 
monograph does not distinguish between Hindustani music or Carnatic 
music. At certain fundamental level all Indian music is one: Samavedic, 
Dhrupad, Hindustani, Carnatic, Rabindra Sangita, Spiritual music, popular 
and folk music. The doctrine of shruti is valid for all categories and 
varieties of Indian music. 
For centuries shrutis are considered as an enigma in Indian music. 
Researchers attempted to demystify the enigma by interpreting three 
seminal texts on Indian music, namely: Naradiya Shiksha, Bharata’s 
Natyashastra and Sangita Ratnakara of Sharangadeva. However, none of 
these attempts led to conclusive and convincing understanding of shruti. 
With thorough scrutiny of the original text from the above-mentioned 
IV 
three treatises, this monograph comes up with a conclusive proof for 
equal temperament twenty two shruti paradigm of Bharata. Apart from 
that it provides a comprehensive frame-work of hundred and ten shrutis
called `shruti-Punja’ model or `Shruti-Megha’ model that may be useful for 
computational Indian music. This model integrates concepts of shruti from 
Naradiya Shiksha into the Bharata’s paradigm of equal temperament 
twenty two shrutis. This may open up the possibility to explore new 
musical spaces, new consonances, new dissonances, new melodies and 
harmonies to take Indian music forward. 
As discussed throughout this monograph there are certain concerns 
among musicologists about the nature and significance of shruti in Indian 
music. Some of the scholars are concerned about the textual 
interpretation of Natyashastra or Naradiya Shiksha. This monograph 
thoroughly scrutinizes the original text from Naradiya Shiksha, 
Natyashastra and Sangita Ratnakar and through conceptual analysis tries 
to fine-tune our understanding about shruti. The crux of this analysis is 
that during ancient times the concept of shruti has evolved in two or three 
stages. Although the Vedas are called shruti, the meaning of the term 
`shruti’, was more spiritual than musical during Vedic period. During Vedic 
period, the term `swara’ was more prevalent than the term `shruti’ to 
denote tonalities of Vedic `mantras’. Naradiya Shiksha uses the term shruti
to denote sonar qualities of Vedic swaras (especially swaras used in 
Samaveda) achieved through tonal variation and modulation and further 
Naradiya Shiksha identifies five categories of shruti. This monograph 
attempted to clarify various notions related to shruti with the help of 
important available resources and Bhatta Shobhakara's commentary on 
Naradiya Shiksha. At the end of this analysis this monograph provides a 
brief summary of results that may be a useful tool for Samagana
practitioners. 
Bharata’s Natyashastra provides a robust paradigm of equal temperament 
twenty two shrutis accommodating the Vedic swaras. Bharata’s paradigm 
is completely different from Naradiya Shiksha. For Naradiya Shiksha 
shrutis are sonar qualities of a swara while for Bharata shrutis are twenty 
two distinct places equally distributed (having equal temperament) across 
the octave. Sharangadeva in his Sangita Ratnakar tries to integrate 
concept of shruti from Naradiya Shiksha into Bharata’s paradigm. He is 
quite successful in doing so to certain extent but there are few 
outstanding issues which are discussed in this monograph. 
V 
This monograph stringently scrutinizes all conceptual and definitional 
issues including the sequence of textual references through rigorous 
analysis of all the original Sanskrit text of the above-mentioned three 
treatises. Thus the definitional issues, conceptual issues, issues related to 
the sequence of description and interpretation in ancient text, have been 
taken care by this monograph & arrived at certain clarity about these 
issues. 
The monograph addresses the ontological issues that in what way shrutis
exist- as microtones, sound qualities, mental concepts or something else? 
As it is discussed, according to Naradiya Shiksha shrutis are microtonal 
sonar qualities of a swara. On the other hand according to Bharata’s 
paradigm shrutis are microtones as equal temperament tonal positions in 
an octave. Thus shrutis have physical existence and in modern times can 
be understood in terms of their frequency values. These are not merely 
mental concepts. It addresses other epistemological issues about how one 
recognizes shruti? Naradiya Shiksha does not give any clear clue about 
how to recognize shrutis. It provides a textual description that is not really 
sufficient but probably the living tradition of Samaveda must have been so 
strong that such a description was sufficient to recognize shrutis those 
days. Bharata’s `Shruti Nidarshanam’ experiment as thoroughly discussed 
is a conclusive proof of the equal temperament twenty two shrutis. This 
also tells a musician to how to establish shrutis on Veena and perceive 
them in a step-by-step manner. Bharata gives highly sophisticated ShrutiNidarshanam or Sarana-Chatushtaya experiment to experience and 
demonstrate twenty two shrutis which is discussed at appropriate place in 
present monograph. This experiment is so accurate and sophisticated, as 
discussed, that one gets awe-struck by the intellectual and mathematical 
genius of the creator of such an experiment. Sharangadeva also had 
devised a variation of the same experiment which also conclusively 
demonstrates the existence of equal temperament twenty two shrutis. The 
present monograph also developed a different variation of the Shruti 
Nidarshanam experiment as discussed in the monograph. 
During last two centuries many models of shruti were proposed by 
scholars who believed that shrutis are not equi-distanced. Computational 
simulation of the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment, using some of the 
above-mentioned models, shows that all these models are wrong. On the 
other hand computational simulation succeeds only with Bharata’s 
paradigm of equal temperament shrutis. With comparative analysis of 
Bharata’s equal temperament scale, contemporary twelve tone equal 
VI 
temperament scale and just intonation scale it was shown that Bharata’s 
equal temperament scale will also be acceptable to musicians and 
audience. Perception and acceptance of musically pleasing notes is a 
psycho-acoustic phenomenon and therefore purely logico-mathematical 
theories will not do any justice to musical experience. Just intonation scale 
is considered as a logico-mathematical ideal scale. From psycho-acoustic 
point of view audience look for some kind of repeatability and consistency 
among the musical notes that produce musical experience. Any equal 
temperament scale will provide such a consistency. Therefore, musicians 
and audience have no problem in accepting twelve tone equal 
temperament scale. Similarly Bharata’s twenty two shruti equal 
temperament scale also should not have any problem for acceptance 
because the consonance tolerance ratio of Bharata’s scale and twelve tone 
scale is same. 
This monograph puts forth two types of arguments: a stronger or primary 
argument and few secondary arguments. The stronger argument is based 
on the critical analysis of Bharata’s original Sanskrit text from 
Natyashastra and then the analysis of the `Shruti Nidarshanam’
experiment as a confirmatory proof of equal temperament twenty two 
shrutis. While doing so, Shruti Nidarshanam experiment is discussed in its 
letters and spirit, `as it is’, without any twist of words or interpretation. 
This monograph completely relies on the original text of Bharata and that 
is the strength of the stronger argument. Shruti Nidarshanam experiment 
is a proof where it shows that any proposal of non-equal temperament
shrutis fails to fulfill the requirement of the `magic’ number twenty two. It 
means that there exists only one solution that fulfils the requirement: 
equal temperament shrutis. The number twenty two is very important 
because Bharata has mentioned it in the text at many occasions very 
clearly and there is no confusion about the number. This stronger 
argument is the crux of this monograph while other arguments are 
supplementary in nature. Apart from the stronger argument, this
monograph provides a step-by-step method of establishing swaras in an 
octave (swara-sthapana or swara mandala sadhanam) based on the 
original text of Bharata. This was not attempted in any other earlier 
studies. This is another original contribution of this monograph. 
There are pragmatic issues related to shrutis those focus on application of 
shrutis in a musical performance. As it is well-known, just intonation scale 
cannot be used for harmonic music using chords. Equal temperament 
scale provides flexibility for octave-shift and so most suitable for chord-
VII 
based music. Thus Bharata’s equal temperament twenty two shrutis 
paradigm will help extending the boundaries of Indian music. It will also 
help exploring new Raga possibilities and microtonal swara-phrases, new 
musical spaces as well as the possibility of inventing new chords. Thus 
Bharata’s paradigm is highly pragmatic that does justice to ancient Vedic 
music as well as it can be relevant to modern music. 
Some of the researchers try understanding shruti from Western point of 
view and apply Western theories to the concept of shruti. This issue is 
addressed by this monograph. It clearly argues that the Western models 
including Pythagorean model as well as just intonation scale have many 
practical difficulties in practicing Indian and Western music. During last 
two centuries researchers un-necessarily tried to force-fit Western 
models on Bharata’s paradigm and eventually could not succeed. In last 
century, due to developments in the field of science and technology, many 
scholars try to frame their arguments by using scientific terminology. 
Similarly in recent times due to advent of Information Technology (IT), 
the whole language of shruti discourse has changed. This new rhetoric 
helps in strengthening Bharata’s paradigm. Computer simulation of `Shruti 
Nidarshanam’ experiment and further analysis help in re-establishing 
Bharata’s paradigm. This analysis also shows that equal temperament 
scale is acceptable to audience and therefore Bharata’s equal 
temperament scale is the most pragmatic solution for the problem of 
shruti. This led to the development of a `Shruti-Punja’ or `Shruti-Megha’
frame-work of equal temperament hundred and ten microtones in an 
octave that integrates all the earlier ancient models of shruti. This framework is an extension of Bharata’s paradigm of equal temperament twenty 
two shrutis. This monograph attempted to argue that Bharata’s paradigm 
is very robust and highly relevant for Indian music in modern times. With 
the help of advanced computational technology it can help exploring 
newer possibilities to enrich Indian music. 
Dr. Vinod Vidwans 
Date: January 26, 2016 
 
VIII 
IX 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Dr. Vinod Vidwans 
X 
1 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The concept of `shruti’ or microtone in Indian music has been a topic of 
scholarly debate for centuries. The concept of shruti appears in Naradiya 
Shiksha in a codified way. An elaborate and systematic description of 
shruti is found in Bharata’s celebrated work on theatrical arts called
`Natyashastra’. It is considered to be the most revered treatise on Indian 
theatrical arts that includes, apart from theatre, the art of music and 
dance. Twenty eighth chapter of Natyashastra is specifically dedicated to 
the discussion on various concepts in Indian music and discussion on 
shruti in particular. 
The concept of shruti or microtone in Indian music also has been a topic of 
lively debate in recent times as well. The debate has taken many twists 
and turns in the last and current century. A huge number of researchers 
are engaged in this debate, it will suffice to mention some of the most 
respected researchers and musicologist such as: Bhatkhande, Telang, 
Popley, Ranade, Bake, Ratanjankar, Kaufmann, and Jairazbhoy who
rejected the relevance of the concept of shruti to contemporary music. 
Others include Deval, Clements, Fox Strangways, Danielou, Bose, Lobo, 
Omkarnath Thakur, Arnold and Bell who believed in direct linkages of the 
concept of shruti with the tradition and contemporary musical practices 
[Rao, S., p. 681]. Apart from these there are many other scholars such as 
Acharya Brihaspati who have significantly contributed to the research on 
shrutis. They reflected on the concept of shruti in their own ways and 
postulated various theories. In recent times there have been many studies 
published on shruti. Many authors have also published comprehensive 
reviews of the available literature on shruti-research. In these studies 
scholars have very aggressively argued their own points of views about 
the nature and significance of shruti in Indian music. The present 
monograph is an attempt to take a stock of all the earlier studies and 
reviews. It is not possible to respond to all the points of views expressed 
by the above-mentioned researchers and other individuals in this work. 
2 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
However, one can see certain patterns of arguments in their research. 
There are few select lines of arguments and this monograph tries to 
address the concerns raised by these arguments. These are considered as 
prime concerns since they challenge basic concepts related to shrutis
described in Naradiya Shiksha and Bharata’s Natyashastra. Some concerns 
are raised about the textual interpretation of Naradiya Shiksha or 
Natyashastra. Some other issues are purely conceptual in nature. In last 
century, due to the developments in the field of physics and acoustics, 
many scholars have tried to frame their arguments by using scientific 
terminology while in recent times due to revitalized interest into shrutiresearch augmented by information technology; the whole language of 
shruti-discourse has changed. Some of the researchers try understanding 
shruti from Western point of view and apply Western theories to the 
concept of shruti. Thus broadly speaking, issues and concerns related to 
shruti can be classified into following categories. There are definitional 
and conceptual issues. For example shrutis can be defined in terms of their 
positions, frequency or quality of sound. Once a particular definition is 
accepted it leads to a particular type of theorization. The other issues are 
related to the sequence of description of shrutis and their interpretation in 
ancient text. The ontological issues such as, in what way shrutis exist - as 
microtones, qualities, mental concepts or something else are also very 
important. For instance, do shrutis exist only as concepts that are in the 
minds of performers and listeners or they are frequencies or a pitch 
positions? The epistemological concerns are about how one recognizes 
shruti correctly. That is how to validate shruti. Finally, the pragmatic 
issues related to shruti focus on application of shruti in a musical 
performance. That means how to play a shruti on the instrument or how 
to render it through voice? This monograph attempts to take a stock of 
these concerns and tries to bring in clarity about the significance of shruti
in Indian music and its relevance. While doing so if necessary these 
concerns are addressed at macro-level as well as at micro-level depending 
on the kind of scrutiny they demand. At times these issues and concerns 
are addressed directly or otherwise they are addressed indirectly. 
1.1 A Brief Overview of the Rhetoric on Shruti
The word shruti is derived from Sanskrit root `shru’, which means `to hear’ 
[Apte, V. S., 1970]. The term shruti is originally used to refer Vedas. Vedas 
are called `shruti’ since they are considered as the revelations by seers 
3 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
[Apte, V. S., 1970]. In Indian musical rhetoric, however, the word shruti 
has completely different connotation and is primarily used as `microtone’ 
in general. Some scholars however, have interpreted the term shruti in 
different ways. During ancient times in the context of Vedic recitations the 
word swara was most commonly used to refer musical notes. The word 
shruti was less prevalent though it is used in Naradiya Shiksha in a 
theoretical discussion. In the tradition of Rigvedic recitation, Udatta, 
Anudatta and the Swarita are referred as swaras and not as shrutis. From 
musical point view here the word swara refers to the accent and/ or pitch 
of the sound of Vedic mantras. Samaveda rendering of mantras was done 
following well-defined rules of swara and shruti usage. Thus the terms 
swara and shruti were understood during Vedic age in a special way and 
their purely musical usage is as ancient as Naradiya Shiksha but not 
beyond that. It seems that shruti and swara have special role in Vedic 
recitation but still the term swara was more prevalent in usage than the 
term shruti. 
Shruti is essentially, a specific frequency or a pitch position in an octave. 
This is the core property of a shruti. Apart from that a shruti has many 
additional or peripheral properties such as volume, timbre, various effects 
such as vibrato, relational properties such as `low’ or` high’ pitch, 
consonance, ornamentation as well as an ability to evoke aesthetic 
emotions and so on and so forth. Somehow many scholars have 
understood and interpreted shruti on the basis of these peripheral 
properties. This has led to confusion among many scholars regarding the 
meaning of the term shruti. During ancient period from Bharata to 
Abhinavagupta and Sharangadeva, all of them have used the term shruti as 
a pitch position as well as its peripheral meanings. Many a times they used 
highly metaphorical language to describe shruti [Rao, S., pp. 674-675]. 
However, it is certain that whenever, the term shruti is used in a technical 
sense or in a theoretical sense, it means a `pitch’ position in an octave and 
when the term shruti is used for explanation or discussion, they have used 
a metaphorical language. For instance Sharangadeva in Sangita Ratnakar
clearly mentions that a shruti is an aurally recognizable difference in pitch 
[Sharangadeva, pp. 56-57]. He also gives separate names to all the twenty 
two shrutis. This is technical information about musical notes and 
therefore Sharangadeva describes shruti in terms of twenty two pitch 
positions on twenty two strings of a Veena. So it may be argued that till the 
times of Sharangadeva, there was no confusion about the concept of 
shruti. Shruti was understood as a pitch position in an octave in theoretical
parlance. 
4 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
From historical perspective, by the time of Ramamatya in 1550 AD and 
Ahobala in seventeenth century, music scholars started making attempts 
to establish positions of swaras and shrutis in an explicitly quantifiable 
manner. All earlier description tells us that earlier musician used to 
establish swaras and shrutis based on the musical sensitivity of the ear or 
based on the auditory/ aural competence of a musician to distinguish the 
difference between two musically significant sounds. Bharata says that 
seven swaras to be established on the Veena like instrument by `swaramandala sadhanam’ [Bharata, p. 15]. That appears to be the well-known 
method and common process of establishing swaras those days, although 
he does not give the explicit details of the process. The process was simple 
(as discussed somewhere else in this monograph) and very commonly 
used and therefore, he might not have felt the need of giving the 
description of this process. In the Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva a 
process of establishing shrutis is very clearly articulated but it is certain 
that it was different from the Bharata’s process of `swara-mandala 
sadhanam’. Sharangadeva clearly describes to adjust twenty two strings 
which are aurally equi-distanced on an instrument that has twenty two 
strings and each string stands for each shruti. This has to be done using 
musical sensitivity of the ear that means the distance between two shrutis
to be judged by ears. Till this time there was no problem about
establishing shrutis or swaras. However, it seems when Ahobala tried to 
place swaras as per the length of the string (though Abhinava also 
mentions establishing swaras by `angula pramana’ i.e. measurement by 
using finger width [Bharata, p. 17] - but Ahobala’s system might be 
different); where the musicians started finding some gap between the 
aurally defined places of shrutis and swaras and the places defined by the 
lengths of the string. Probably, this was the first time due to quantifiable 
process of establishing swaras, the ancient and traditional places of 
swaras and shrutis got displaced. [Rao, S., pp. 675-677]. Ancient musical 
sensitivity was perfectly tuned with aurally established shrutis by Bharata 
and substantiated by Abhinava Gupta in his commentary [Bharata, pp. 15-
17]. Sharangadeva also seconded this practice of establishing shrutis. 
[Sharangadeva, p. 57]. With the new development there appeared to be a 
change in the musical perception and sensitivity and musicians started 
questioning the earlier paradigm of aurally established shrutis. Even today 
for example, contemporary musicians are comfortable with twelve note 
equal temperament scale, though the puritans argue for `just intonation’ 
scale in the Western Music. Musical sensitivity is a conditioned 
phenomenon to a great extent although; basic laws of physics have to be 
5 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
followed. So after sixteenth and seventeenth century onwards, there 
appears to be a conflict between ancient description of twenty two shrutis
and medieval musical practices. 
1.2 The Modern Debate 
Bharata’s Natyashastra gives an elaborate treatment to the concept of 
shruti though it does not give explicit definition of the term shruti. Modern 
debate revolves around Bharata’s description of shruti. Bharata uses the 
term shruti as a `unit’ of measurement or the `shrutyantara’ to define the 
relationship between two musical notes in terms of consonances 
(Samvadas) and dissonance (Vivada) [Bharata, p. 15]. This usage provides 
some scholars to interpret shrutis as units of measurement such as `Dvishruti’, `Tri-shruti’, `Chatuh-shruti’ etc. According to these scholars shruti is 
not a pitch position but a `unit’ of measurement to aurally measure the 
distance between two swaras. Bharata uses the term `Pramana shruti’ as 
well [Bharata, p. 20]. Some scholars got carried away by this usage and 
delimited their understanding of shrutis to it. According to them 
`Pramana’ means standard and `Dvi-shruti’, `Tri-shruti’, `Chatuh-shruti’ are 
the three standard units of categorizing swaras. As it is well-known that 
consonances and dissonances are understood in terms of the pitch of 
notes, it is evident that Pramana shruti is the standard unit of 
differentiating and correlating consonant and dissonant musical notes in 
terms of their pitch. However, these scholars do not agree with this 
interpretation and the debate continues. The pitch distinction and 
correlation is done using ear alone where it is expected that a musician 
has a good capability of differentiating musical pitch. Bharata provides 
highly sophisticated description of shruti in his discussion on Gramas
(musical scales), Swara-Mandala-Sadhanam (establishment of seven 
swaras in an octave) and his well-illustrated experiment called `ShrutiNidarshanam’ to ascertain, verify, generate, demonstrate and validate 
twenty two shrutis in an octave. Each one of these topics has been the 
issue of debate in modern times.
The modern scholars have developed many theoretical models (which do 
not agree among themselves) of shruti. Based on their own models they 
try to interpret shruti-distances and various other concepts related to 
shrutis. There are three unit distances as mentioned above in the 
Natyashastra: two-shruti distance (Re-Ga and Dha-Ni), three-shruti
distance (Sa-Re and Pa-Dha), and four-shruti distance (Ga-Ma, Ma-Pa and 
6 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Ni-Sa). This clearly indicates that the unit of measuring the musical 
distance is shruti. Due to this, most of the modern scholars assume that 
un-equal twenty two shrutis among seven swaras are distributed in an 
uneven manner. As a result, many scholars have interpreted this
description in such a way that it appeared as a mathematical problem of 
distributing unequal shruti distances among seven swaras. So it became a 
mathematical problem in the context of this description and its
interpretation. However, this problem is a recent one since scholars have 
tried to understand shrutis in terms of their frequencies. During ancient 
period this problem never appeared because from the description of 
Bharata as well as Sharangadeva, shrutis were understood with aural 
sensitivity of ears. 
The problem became more and more critical when Bharata’s octave is 
compared with the Pythagorean cyclical model of musical scale and the 
`just intonation’ scale that is developed in the West. There exists a big 
mismatch. Interestingly, Pythagorean formula of generating microtones 
by applying the `rule of fifth’ six times in ascending and descending 
directions leads to twelve tones having unequal distances among
themselves (by this method one can generate infinite number of 
microtones within a scale). Pythagorean scale is not an equal 
temperament scale. Apart from the Pythagorean scale there is a `just 
intonation’ scale that is developed by applying a mathematical formula 
based on simple ratios. This formula claims that musical notes that adhere 
to simple ratios such as 2/1, 3/2, 4/3, 5/4 and so on are musically 
pleasant. An octave based on these ratios is called a `just intonation’ scale. 
In this scale, any two notes have a ratio that is based on harmonic series. 
`Just- intonation’ is the tuning system supposed to be codified by Ptolemy; 
it was the aesthetic ideal of the Renaissance music as well. It is considered 
as the most mathematical and aurally perfect scale. Bharata’s description 
of twenty two shrutis scale does not match either with Pythagorean 
microtones or so-called logical and aurally perfect `just intonation’ scale. 
Adjusting twenty two shrutis of Bharata’s scale, among notes of 
Pythagorean scale or `just intonation’ scale of seven swaras is absolutely 
impossible. In this sense it is not at all a mathematical problem. It is an 
impossibility. However, surprisingly, the intelligentsia in the last century 
has spent their time and energy in attempting this. In this process 
majority of scholars, have unanimously assumed that twenty two shrutis
of Bharata’s scale being aurally pleasant and perfect, should adhere to 
Pythagorean scale or `just intonation’ scale. This conclusion goes against 
ancient practices and also against the textual description of Bharata and 
7 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Sharangadeva. The paradigm of `just intonation’ scale is so fascinating and 
powerful that the author of the present monograph had also got carried 
away by it for more than last twenty years. However, close scrutiny of 
various interpretations of Bharata’s paradigm of twenty two shrutis using 
computational simulations and analysis helped the author realize that 
these interpretations are not correct. Another realization was that the 
Pythagorean scale and the `just intonation’ scale are rational and 
mathematical scales; but not necessarily empirical scales. There exists a 
conflict between logic and reality. Having overcome the fascination for 
the Pythagorean scale and `just intonation’ scales, the author has 
examined Bharata’s paradigm of twenty two shrutis as dispassionately as 
possible. Therefore, this monograph has tried to scrutinize the original 
text from Naradiya Shiksha, Natyashastra of Bharata, and Sangita 
Ratnakar of Sharangadeva in a rigorous way to understand the concept of
shruti. 
 
8 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
9 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
2. ANCIENT LITERATURE ON SHRUTI 
Naradiya Shiksha, Natyashastra of Bharata, and Sangita Ratnakar of 
Sharangadeva are considered as the ancient most literary sources to 
understand music of Vedic age as well as traditional Indian music. The 
original text of Natyashastra and Sangita Ratnakar is available in almost 
its original form without much loss of the text. But in the case of Naradiya 
Shiksha it seems certain portions have been added after the age of Panini 
and some after Bharata’s Natyashastra. Dr. Usha Bhise writes, “A collation 
of Mss. [Manuscripts] from different parts of India indicates that they do 
not differ vitally from each other. Their evidence goes to prove that the 
text of Naradiya Shiksha has come down to us intact. However, the 
internal evidence points in another direction. There are losses as well as 
change of order. Spurious portions added a few centuries later are not 
lacking”. [Bhise, P. 2]. The available text of Naradiya Shiksha, in its 
present form, is thus does not appear to be a consistent document. 
Therefore, many scholars completely disregard Naradiya Shiksha as 
reliable source of reference. However, there is no option since all the 
versions of manuscripts appear originating from the same document. 
Nevertheless, Naradiya Shiksha is revered among Indian scholars and 
considered as the most ancient resource on Indian music. Abhinavagupta 
and many other commentators of Natyashastra have frequently quoted 
from Naradiya Shiksha. 
Naradiya Shiksha has been referred in this monograph extensively. 
According to the author of this monograph, Naradiya Shiksha is a valuable 
resource for following reasons. After close scrutiny of the text of the 
Naradiya Shiksha one arrives at the conclusion that many parts of the 
Naradiya Shiksha are ancient. There might be some interpolations of text 
but Abhinavagupta and later commentators have not doubted the 
authenticity of Naradiya Shiksha. One can say that though interpolated, 
the text still can be considered as ancient and even these interpolations 
are also ancient. Secondly, it is also possible that one need not look at it 
10 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
from historical point of view. It is quite likely that many of the concepts 
and practices of music must be as ancient as Vedas. Their theoretical 
codification must have happened in later stage. Thirdly, the so-called 
interpolation of text can be considered as integration and upgradation of 
text since Naradiya Shiksha was an instructional manual for practical 
manifestation of Samaveda. For example, the authors of the Kaundinyayan 
commentary of Naradiya Shiksha that is referred in this monograph 
clearly mentions that certain shlokas have been realigned while writing 
the commentary for the ease of understanding [Kaundinyayan, S., pp. 24-
26]. Since it was about the practical science of music such realignment, 
integration (even interpolation) and assimilation is imminent. 
Authenticity of Naradiya Shiksha may not stand for the strict scholarly 
scrutiny still it can be said that by and large it is an ancient document and 
it is possible to segregate concepts which are specific to Naradiya Shiksha
and which are not. For instance, there is no mention of twenty two shrutis
in Naradiya Shiksha. One can say that the concept of twenty two shrutis is 
a later development during Bharata’s age. But other concepts such as 
Grama, Murchchhana, swara-mandala etc. were there. Probably, Bharata 
has borrowed them from Naradiya Shiksha. Similarly swara positions of 
seven swaras and their order were certainly well-known during the time 
of Naradiya Shiksha since they have Vedic origins and context (this point 
is explained at appropriate place in this monograph). Bharata must have 
inherited them. (However all this discussion is beyond the scope of this 
monograph). Therefore, Naradiya Shiksha is a valuable resource for study 
of Indian music in general and study of shrutis in particular. 
Thus any discussion of shrutis remains incomplete without referring 
Naradiya Shiksha. One of the important available commentaries on 
Naradiya Shiksha is supposed to be by Bhatta Shobhakara but even that is 
also not available in authentic form. There are many alterations and 
inconsistencies. The complex issue is that the text of Naradiya Shiksha, 
Bhatta Shobhakara's commentary and the Samaveda surviving practice do 
not match with each other satisfactorily. In such a situation a research 
cannot rely on either of commentaries, text and the practice. Still, based 
on the available literature, issues related to shruti and their types are 
discussed in this monograph to bring out some order in understanding. 
For the following discussion thus apart from Bhatta Shobhakara’s 
commentary, three other sources on Naradiya Shiksha are also referred. 
There is an English translation of Naradiya Shiksha by Dr. Usha Bhise. It is 
supposed to be highly meticulous and fine-tuned translation done in 
consultation with well-known musicologist Dr. Ashok D. Ranade. This 
11 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
translation is highly precise and follows grammarian tradition (but has 
become highly literal). It is a valuable resource. Another important 
resource is the Hindi translation of Naradiya Shiksha by Kaundinyayan 
tradition of Samaveda from Nepal. This is very helpful because it relates 
ancient musical concepts to living tradition of Samaveda. The third very 
important resource is Naradiya Shiksha published by Sanskrit 
Mahapathashala Mysore. It gives Bhatta Shobhakara’s commentary as 
well as the elaborate analysis of Naradiya Shiksha. Bhatta Shobhakara’s 
commentary is further elaborated by Narayana Swami Dikshit who was 
the head of the Samaveda School (Pradhana Upadhyaya) in Mysore. He 
refers to the manuscript of Naradiya Shiksha and familiarizes readers with 
many conventions of diacritical marks in the manuscript/ calligraphy as 
well as decoding many subtle musical conventions. For instance, at times 
in Samaveda rendering a particular swara is not actually rendered but 
there is just a suggestion of that swara. These insights are very valuable 
for any researcher. Encoding, decoding and diacritical representation of 
such subtleties is explained in his commentary. This is the most valuable 
commentary available on Naradiya Shiksha in this regard. Thus every 
attempt is made to be as authentic as possible. 
As far as the shruti-research is concerned, it is certain that during the age 
of Naradiya Shiksha, shrutis were understood as qualities of swaras
classified into five `jatis’ or types. Bharata’s Natyashastra provides a new 
paradigm of twenty two shrutis. Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva gives 
us the list of shruti names and classifies twenty two shrutis into five jatis
mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha. Bharata does not talk about five shruti 
jatis as well as he does not give the name-list of shrutis. So there exists 
some strong logic to believe that Naradiya Shiksha, Bharata’s Natyashastra
and Sangita Ratnakar tried to codify and theorize the then prevalent 
musical knowledge in their own ways. There are many similarities as well 
as striking differences in theorization of music in these treatises. 
Following discussion greatly relies on the above-mentioned available 
resources in their present form. Therefore, this monograph does not go 
into the historical debate. This monograph tries to probe various concepts 
related to shruti from purely theoretical point of view and not from 
historical perspective. It tries to compare and analyze concepts of shruti
discussed in Naradiya Shiksha, Natyashastra of Bharata and Sangita 
Ratnakar of Sharangadeva purely as theoretical constructs and develop 
insights. Natyashastra of Bharata and Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva 
are available in their original authentic form so there is not much dispute 
about the authenticity of the contents of them. It appears that
12 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Natyashastra provided profound theoretical foundations for the concept 
of shruti and Sangita Ratnakar preserved it. The Natyashastra text 
referred in this monograph is published by the Oriental Institute of 
Baroda in 1964. It is along with the commentary in Sanskrit by 
Abhinavagupta. The whole text is edited by M. Ramakrishna Kavi and J. S. 
Pade. Another source for Natyashastra used is a Hindi translation and 
commentary of 28th chapter of Natyashastra by Acharya Brihaspati. Both 
the sources are highly respected by scholars. Sharangadeva’s Sangita 
Ratnakar is another important source. For this monograph Marathi 
translation and commentary of Sangita Ratnakar by G. H. Taralekar 
published by Maharashtra Rajya Sahitya Sanskriti Mandala, Mumbai in 
1975 is referred. Every attempt is made to refer original Sanskrit text in 
authentic form as a primary source for this monograph. 
The flow of discussion in this monograph is as follows. Initially an analysis 
of the concept of shruti according to Naradiya Shiksha is presented. It will 
cover Vedic swara/ shruti concepts, musical swara/ shruti and its 
thorough discussion. Next part of the monograph is dedicated to explore 
the conceptual theorization of shruti according to Natyashastra covering 
the topics such as `Swara-Sthapana’ or establishing swaras/ shrutis, 
Pramana Shruti, and Shruti-Nidarshanam. This section attempts to provide 
justification in favor of equal temperament twenty two shruti paradigm. It 
will also cover views of Sharangadeva from his treatise titled Sangita 
Ratnakar and will discuss how the concepts of shruti from Naradiya 
Shiksha are integrated with the concepts of shruti from Natyashastra. The 
last part of the monograph will attempt to look at issues related to shruti
in the context of contemporary understanding of wide-ranging domains 
including scientific, technological, psycho-acoustic and computational 
perspectives. At the end a comprehensive frame-work to understand 
phenomenon of shruti is developed and presented. 
 
13 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
3. VEDIC CONCEPT OF SHRUTI/ SWARA 
The word shruti is derived from Sanskrit root `shru’, which means `to hear’ 
as already mentioned. The term is also used to refer Vedic mantras
(sacred verses). Vedas are called `shruti’ since there is a faith among the 
believers that Vedic mantras are not composed by humans, but are the 
revelations by seers. These revelations are in the form of divine inner 
voice, sounds/ visions or inspirations. In Indian musical rhetoric, 
however, the word shruti has more specific technical meaning. Shrutis are 
considered as `microtones’ or subtle sonar qualities of swaras in Indian 
music. Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda are the four Vedas. 
Mantras of each Veda are chanted, recited or sung in different styles.
Mantras of Rigveda are supposed to be chanted or recited. Mantras of 
Yajurveda and Atharvaveda are recited while mantras from Samaveda are 
considered as musical compositions or songs. Samaveda is one of the four 
Vedas which is dedicated to music thus, mostly chanting and recitation of 
Vedic mantras is done in at least three accents/ tonalities. These three 
tonalities are considered as three Vedic swaras, namely: Udatta swara, 
Anudatta swara and Swarita swara. All these three types of swaras are 
used in Rigveda and Samaveda but in their own ways. The Samavedic 
rendering is supposed to be musical rendering. From musical point of 
view here the word shruti refers to, apart from musical pitch, timbre, tonal 
quality, subtle sonar qualities and defines the qualities of Samavedic 
swaras. It is believed that the ritualistic musical renderings of Samavedic 
swaras following laws of shruti intonations have spiritual significance. 
Main motivation behind practicing Vedic chanting and recitation has been 
to attain spiritual goals in life. So there seems a very strong connection 
between the larger Vedic-divine and spiritual, context of the meaning of 
the word shruti and its musically significant application or usage in Vedas
in general and Samaveda in particular. It seems that shrutis and swaras
have special role in meditation and they were considered as important 
tools for achieving spiritual goals. Naradiya Shiksha provides a vital link 
14 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
between Vedic concept of shruti and the musical concept of shruti since it 
gives account of shrutis from both the perspectives: spiritual and musical. 
Within Rig-Veda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda there were many 
practices and norms. Readings from Naradiya Shiksha gives us some 
glimpses of them. The second shloka from Naradiya Shiksha gives 
description of various prevalent practices of Vedic recitation prevalent 
those days as follows. 
आिचर्कं गािथकं चैव सािमकं च ःवरान्तरम | ् कृतान्तेःवरशास्तर्ाणाम ्ूयोक्तव्यं िवशषतः े ||
[Naradiya Shiksha: 1-1-2] 
The different notes or swaras employed in the recitation of Rigvedic 
verses, Gathas or the narratives which are sung during `Yajnya’, and the 
Samaganas should be rendered after thorough understanding of the 
science of intonations [Bhise, p.75]. 
Bhatta Shobhakara in his commentary says that the objective of this 
shloka is to understand the ways and means of rendering swaras for Vedic 
recitation as well as `Jagadadi’ that is for the `worldly’ applications of 
swaras or the non-spiritual, non-Vedic music [Narada, p.2]. He further
says that Rigvedic recitation, Gatha recitation and Samagana rendering 
should be performed after thorough understanding of the science of 
swaras. One should also know the `swarantaram’ or the relationships 
between one swara and the other swaras that are being used and then 
only swaras should be rendered appropriately [Narada, p.2]. In the case of
Gatha recitation, while rendering the `Text’ from the Brahmana treatises, 
it should be rendered according to the instructions provided. Probably he 
indicates that the text with diacritical marks should be followed 
rigorously- `gatha swarakshara prayojyani’ [Narada, p. 2]. The next shloka
of Naradiya Shiksha gives more details or description of Vedic practices 
and manifestation of swaras. 
एकान्तरःवरो ह्यृक्षुगाथासुद्व्यन्तरः ःवरः | सामसुत्र्यन्तरं िवद्यादेतावत्ःवरतोऽन्तरम || ्
[Naradiya Shiksha: 1-1-3]
In the recitation of Rigvedic verses, the interval between two notes is one 
(unit). It is two in the case of the Gathas and three in the case of the 
Samaveda. This much is the interval between one note and the other. 
[Bhise, pp. 1-2] 
15 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
This shloka throws light on the ancient concepts of employing swaras for 
Rigveda, Gathas and Samagana. The above-mentioned translation actually 
does not convey much about the ancient practice of rendering swaras in 
Vedic recitation. While Narayana Swami Dikshit on elaborating on Bhatta 
Shobhakara’s interpretation of this shloka, mentions that as per the 
tradition established by Sharangadeva and Kallinatha this shloka should 
be understood in a slightly different way. Accordingly, Rigvedic verses 
used to be `eka-swara’ i.e. recited using only one swara- `richam eka 
swarashrayatvat’. The Gathas that are the parts of Brahmana texts were 
recited using two swaras- `gathiko dviswarah’ and the Samagana use three 
swaras for recitation- `triswarah tanah samikah’. Further he says that 
three swaras range of Samagana can be extended up to seven swaras
including three octaves- `samnantu triswaratvam sapta swaratvepi 
mandradi sthana trayam vivakshaya’ [Narada, p.2]. As per Bhatta 
Shobhakara, this shloka describes the Vedic practice of the degree of pitch 
accent of the Udatta, Anudatta and Swarita notes. Thus in the Rigvedic 
recitation the pitch accent should be within the range of one shruti. Even 
for the Swarita note the pitch range should be of half a shruti [Narada, 
p.3]. Here certainly Bhatta Shobhakara is referring to shruti as a unit of 
pitch difference between any two pitch positions (following Bharata’s 
paradigm) and not shruti as a subtle sonar intonation as postulated by 
Naradiya Shiksha in a strict sense. Bharata’s paradigm of twenty two 
shrutis was so powerful and robust that most of the later commentators
such as Bhatta Shobhakara used Bharata’s vocabulary at many places 
while discussing concepts from Naradiya Shiksha. For instance, as 
mentioned above Bhatta Shobhakara in his commentary explains swara
rendering for Richas, Gathas, and Sama in terms of `one shruti’, `two 
shrutis’ and `three shrutis’. At one occasion he also talks about `half-shruti’ 
distance. It means that the later commentators tried to understand and 
interpret earlier literature such as Naradiya Shiksha from Bharata’s point 
of view. 
Rigvedic richas (two line stanzas) are supposed to be recited as prayers. 
These are not songs. Therefore they are recited as chants with minimum 
tonal variation. More importance is given to stress accent rather than 
pitch accent though if one looks at the tradition the stress accent of 
Rigveda has slight pitch variation which is natural. Vedic accent is nothing 
but the phonetic importance given to a particular syllable in a Vedic word 
since these mantras are composed in chhandas (Vedic meters). When this 
importance is highlighted through greater force, typically by a
combination of loudness of a syllable or extending it to a full articulation 
16 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
of the vowel, without much change in the pitch of the sound, then it is 
called a stress accent. It is of three types: Udatta- acute accent (raised), 
Anudatta- grave accent (lowered) and the third is known as Swarita- the 
circumflexed or rounded accent. Therefore, there is not much pitch 
variation in Rigvedic recitation. Such a recitation is called Archikaoriginated from word richa in Sanskrit. Stress on a particular syllable is 
intentional (spiritual) or purely linguistic (phonetic) due to the forthcoming conjunct, pro-longed vowel, or even complex consonants etc. 
Bhatta Shobhakara tries to indicate that the stress accent should be within 
the range of one shruti. If it surpasses the range of one shruti then it is 
converted into a pitch accent that is designated for Gatha recital. 
Naturally, if the tonal range crosses the limit of one shruti then the stress 
accent gets converted into a pitch accent. Mostly the difference of tonal 
range between Udatta and the Anudatta swara then would be of two 
shrutis while the Swarita would be still of half a shruti range. Thus when 
the accent is produced through tonal variation, it is called pitch accent and 
also it attains some musical quality. Rigvedic richas were rendered within 
the range of one shruti while Gathas were rendered in the range of two 
shrutis. 
Pitch accent is a term that is used for a variety of tonal accent-practices 
that either use variations in pitch to give importance to a syllable within a 
word or have a contrast between different tones in the stressed syllables 
alone. The accent is also influenced by the Vedic meter or chhandas that 
are used for composition of mantras. The chhandas influence Vedic 
mantras in two ways. Chhanda triggers force on specific syllables resulting 
into accent due to metric rhythm. Secondly, chhanda also generates 
metrical rhythmic pattern due to pauses (yati), complex conjuncts and 
phonetic variations. Generally the accent and tonal variation of mantras 
co-exist leading to metrical rhythmic patterns that are reflected in tala
patterns of Indian music. Again it is intentional (spiritual) or purely 
linguistic and musical (this itself is a promising area of further research). 
Pitch-accented recitation practices may have a more complex accent 
practices than stress-accented recitation due to more codified metrical 
system as elaborately explained in the Chhandasutras of Pingalacharya. In 
some cases they have more than a binary tonal distinction and can have 
more tones employed. The Vedic recitations have a pitch-produced stress 
accent, and the Vedic Sanskrit has preserved this pitch accent by working 
it into the Udatta- `acute’ (raised) tone and Swarita- `circumflex’ (going 
upwards and then falling) tone, and the Anudatta as a `grave’ tone (i.e. 
lower) as already mentioned. However, there were multi-pitch based 
17 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
systems such as of Samagana that eventually led into full-fledged seven 
swara musical systems. Tradition believes that all music originates from 
Samagana. Thus Bhatta Shobhakara says the Samagana recitation would 
have the range of three shrutis that is extending beyond two shruti-ranges 
of Gathas. 
Surviving traditions of Rigveda have preserved both the accents- stress 
accent and pitch accent. We find Rigvedic `chanting’ with stress accent 
while the Rigvedic `recitation’ follows the pitch accent up to three pitch 
variations i.e. Udatta, Anudatta and Swarita rendering. Even the Swarita
has one variation called Prachaya and Anudatta has a variation called 
Nighata so it means that multi-pitch rendering has become a natural 
requirement of Vedic recitation. If carefully studied it is evident that 
traces of Rigvedic stress accents are preserved in ancient musical systems 
of India. Similarly traces of chhandas or Vedic metrical system are 
preserved in Indian tala system (this is beyond the scope of present 
monograph). Especially Bharata’s music system is significant in this 
respect because it articulates pitch positions of musical notes by following 
Vedic practices as discussed in following paragraphs. If one compares 
Bharata’s seven swaras with contemporary musical notes then it is 
evident that the Shadja, Madhyama and Panchama of Bharata’s system 
and contemporary Shadja, Madhyama and Panchama notes are almost the 
same. There is not much difference. Major difference lies with Bharata’s 
Gandhara and contemporary Gandhara swara. Contemporary Gandhara
matches with Bharata’s Antara Gandhara. It means Bharata was aware 
about this swara position. Even its counterpart Kakali Nishada was also 
recognized by Bharata in his system. He continued with his system as the 
standard system of seven swaras that included- Shadja, Bharata’s 
Rishabha (tri-shrutic), Bharata’s Gandhara (dvi-shrutic), Madhyama, 
Panchama, Bharata’s Dhaivata (tri-shrutic), and Bharata’s Nishada (dvishrutic). 
Interestingly the origin of Bharata’s Rishabha (tri-shrutic), and Bharata’s 
Gandhara (dvi-shrutic), as well as the origin of their counter parts 
Bharata’s Dhaivata (tri-shrutic) and Bharata’s Nishada (dvi-shrutic) lie in 
the practice of Vedic recitation using stress accent and pitch accent. When 
a Rigvedic stress accents transform into a pitch accents they get certain 
tonality. The acute accent becomes more raised and the grave accent gets 
more lowered simply because of tonality and force. After the analysis of 
audio recordings of Samagana renderings, Dr. Sulabha Thakar has arrived 
18 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
at the conclusion that Bharata’s Gandhara, Nishada, Rishabha and 
Dhaivata have a strong connection with Vedic recitation [Thakar, S., pp. 5-
13]. However, in her analysis, Dr. Sulabha Thakar argues that Bharata’s 
shrutis were not equal temperament shrutis. Therefore her analysis of 
shrutis is not accepted in the present monograph but her insights about
the genesis of Bharata’s Gandhara, Nishada, Rishabha and Dhaivata swaras
from Vedic practices are considered valuable and further developed in 
this monograph as follows. When a Rigvedic recitation is performed, it 
starts with a loud and raised voice. If we assume this as the Shadja swara
of the contemporary octave then this is called the Udatta swara of 
Rigvedic recitation. When it is lowered down for Anudatta swara it is 
lowered down towards Komal Nishada and because of the forceful stress it 
is lowered a bit further so it becomes Ati-Komal Nishada. This is actually 
the Bharata’s Nishada (dvi-shrutic) four shrutis lower to Shadja. Similarly, 
when rounded accent of swarita is rendered, the voice is raised with some 
force towards Rishabha (Rishabha of contemporary octave) but does not 
reach up to the Rishabha proper (contemporary Rishabha) since Swarita is 
a circumflex note and it has to just go close to that point and come back to 
the normal position (that is Udatta). That particular higher point is 
slightly lower than the Rishabha (contemporary Rishabha). This is actually 
the Bharata’s Rishabha three shrutis higher than Shadja and one shruti 
lower than contemporary Rishabha. The contemporary Rishabha is called 
Chatuh-shruti Rishabha (Rishabha with four shrutis) in Bharata’s 
traditional system. This description is seen when the recitation is 
performed in a Shadja Grama. If the recitation of Rigveda is performed in a 
Madhyama Grama then respective Udatta etc. swaras would be as follows. 
Udatta swara will be the Madhyama swara. Anudatta will become the 
Bharata’s Gandhara, i.e. being four shrutis lower than Madhyama. 
Similarly, the Swarita would be slightly lower than the Panchama. This 
Panchama is nothing but the `Chyuta Panchama’ or Panchama lowered by 
one shruti as mentioned by Bharata. This also discloses the secret why 
Madhyama Grama has a Panchama that is one shruti lower than the 
Panchama of a Shadja Grama. It is also said by Abhinavagupta that thus 
lowered Panchama (Chyuta Panchama) is the defining swara of a 
Madhyama Grama and therefore it is not omitted from Madhyama Grama
ever [Bharata, p. 21]. If the same recitation is performed in Shadja Grama 
starting with Panchama then the Panchama will become Udatta swara. 
Madhyama will become the Anudatta, i.e. being four shrutis lower and the 
tri-shrutic Dhaivata of Bharata’s system will become the Swarita. This 
property of Udatta etc. swaras for Rigvedic recitation is amazing and 
19 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
makes a very strong case for inclusion of Dvi-shrutic Gandhara, Tri-shrutic 
Rishabha, Tri-shrutic Dhaivata, and Dvi-shrutic Nishada among the twenty 
two shrutis. Thus, Bharata’s system has a strong legacy of Vedic recitation. 
Vedic practices were very richly integrated in Bharata’s system. Looking 
at its connection with categories of Rigvedic and Samavedic swaras such as 
Udatta, Anudatta and Swarita, it is fairly clear that Vedic swaras are 
understood in terms of shrutis as postulated in Bharata’s system. 
Traditionally, these three swaras are understood in terms of the number 
of shrutis assigned to each one of them. For instance, out of the three Vedic 
swaras, in the tradition of Rigvedic recitation as mentioned by 
Abhinavagupta, Udatta swara is considered to have four shrutis (Udatta
means big or large so maximum number of shrutis are assigned to it), 
Anudatta swara is considered to have two shrutis (since Anudatta means 
opposite of Udatta so it has only two shrutis assigned) and the Swarita 
swara is considered to have three shrutis (as it is the middle state between 
Udatta and Anudatta) [Abhinavagupta in Bharata, p. 14]. This scheme is 
consistent with Bharata’s paradigm of shrutis. Bharata assigns four shrutis
to Shadja, Madhyama and Panchama swaras. According to Rigvedic 
practice these are also considered as Udatta swaras. Gandhara and 
Nishada have been allotted two shrutis each in Bharata’s scheme which 
are considered as Anudatta swaras in Rigvedic practices. Rishabha and 
Dhaivata have been assigned three shrutis each in Bharata’s paradigm 
which are the Swarita swaras of Rigvedic recitation. Thus Vedic swaras
were attempted to be understood in terms of shrutis. However this 
convention is valid only in the case of Rigveda. In the case of Samaveda 
this convention does not apply. 
Due to strong Rigvedic recitation practices Bharata’s octave with Trishrutic Rishabha, Dvi-shrutic Gandhara and Tri-shrutic Dhaivata and Dvishrutic Nishada and with Chatuh-shrutic Shadja, Madhyama, and 
Panchama became relevant and got established. Naradiya Shiksha has 
mentioned these swara positions and Bharata preserved them in his 
system. The three swara system of Rigveda and Samavedic recitation 
using seven swaras were co-existing paradigms and they are 
comprehensively accommodated within Bharata’s octave. There is a 
marked difference between the swara positions of Rigvedic swaras and 
Samavedic swaras. Rigveda uses only three pitch positions and some 
minor variations of them. On the other hand Samaveda uses mainly three 
to five swaras but can go up to seven swaras in rendering. Samaveda 
20 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
recitation is more musical than the Rigvedic recitation. The Samavedic 
swara positions are described in the following shloka of Naradiya Shiksha. 
उदात्ते िनषादगान्धारावनुदात्ते ऋषभधैवतौ | ःविरतूभवा ह्येते षड्जमध्यमपञ्चमाः||
[Naradiya Shiksha: 1-8-8] 
Nishada and Gandhara originate from the Udatta swara, while Rishabha
and Dhaivata originate from Anudatta swara. Shadja, Madhyama and 
Panchama have their origins in the Swarita [Bhise, U., p. 108]. 
The above shloka explains how to convert Rigvedic swaras into Samavedic 
swaras. As discussed earlier, the Rigvedic recitation is rendered in three 
swaras. When same hymns are converted into Samaveda recitation, 
certain changes occur. As a result, as mentioned in this shloka, Udatta 
swara of Rigvedic recitation is replaced by either Nishada or Gandhara (of 
Bharata’s octave) in an appropriate way. In the earlier discussion we 
mentioned that Udatta of Rigveda could be set to Shadja, Madhyama or 
Panchama. However, in Samavedic paradigm they were replaced by 
Nishada or Gandhara. In the same manner Anudatta is replaced by either 
Rishabha or Dhaivata (of Bharata’s octave) appropriately. The Swarita
becomes Shadja, Madhyama or Panchama (of Bharata’s octave) depending 
on the context. This shloka also highlights the importance of Bharata’s 
paradigm since it provides foundational frame-work for conversion of 
Rigvedic swaras into Samavedic swaras. 
Samagana is performed in Madhyama Grama. Therefore, with the above 
mentioned scheme of swaras, if Madhyama is considered as the Swarita
then Gandhara becomes Udatta and Rishabha becomes Anudatta. If the 
Samagana is performed in Shadja Grama then Swarita would be Shadja. 
Udatta will be Bharata’s Nishada and Anudatta will be Bharata’s Dhaivata. 
However interestingly, Samagana uses more than three swaras and 
therefore other swaras are used appropriately to enrich the performance. 
Samagana also adheres to Bharata’s octave and therefore the swara places 
are different as compared to Rigvedic recitations and the whole musical 
impact of Samaveda is different. Due to redefining of the Udatta etc. 
swaras the swara relations have changed in Samagana. In Rigvedic 
recitation Anudatta was four shruti lower than Udatta. In Samagana 
Anudatta i.e. Bharata’s Rishabha is two shrutis lower than the Udatta i.e. 
Bharata’s Gandhara. Similarly, in Rigvedic recitation Swarita was three 
shrutis raised than the Udatta while in Samagana Swarita i.e. Madhyama is 
21 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
four shrutis raised than the Udatta. So Anudatta and Swarita swaras have 
moved out of the stress/ pitch accent paradigm. This actually brings 
Samaveda music much closer to contemporary practices. For instance, if 
Udatta is set to Shadja then Anudatta will be the Kakali Nishada of 
Bharata’s octave which is actually the Nishada of present day octave. 
Similarly, then Swarita will have to be set to four shrutis higher i.e. Chatuh 
shruti Rishabha of Bharata’s octave which is actually the Shuddha 
Rishabha of present day octave. So it is possible to re-interpret and revive 
Samagana rendering in today’s context and make it sound familiar. 
Thus the Rigvedic recitation and Samavedic music have their own
identities and one can see its connection with contemporary music. All 
types of music, so-called `Laukika’ (worldly) music and classical music 
grow and evolve simultaneously. Therefore the growth of ancient classical 
Indian music must have been occurring along with Vedic as well as nonVedic music and that is documented in Naradiya Shiksha as well as in 
Natyashastra. However, it is important to note that the term `swara’ was 
used prominently instead of the term `shruti’ in the above discussion. 
Following sections deal with the concept of shruti in Samagana music as 
well as in non-Vedic music as discussed in Naradiya Shiksha. 
 
22 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
23 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
4. SHRUTI IN NARADIYA SHIKSHA 
Chapters in Naradiya Shiksha are called `Prapathakah’, and sections are 
called `Kandika’. The Kandika is made up of number of shlokas. Vedic 
music and `Laukika’ or worldly music is discussed in the fifth section of 
the first chapter of Naradiya Shiksha. First two shlokas introduce the seven 
swaras that are used in Samagana. Then a set of swara-names is also 
mentioned that is used in worldly music. It is also possible that flute may 
have been a popular musical instrument that is used as an accompaniment 
for Samavedic performances, as Samavedic swaras are explained in terms 
of their positions on a flute using popular swara-names. With the new 
settings, as mentioned earlier and replacement of swaras, Samagana
became distinct from Rigvedic recitation. It is worth noticing that the 
vocabulary of Rigveda uses swara names as Udatta, Anudatta and Swarita
however, Samaveda no more uses this vocabulary. It uses swara names as 
Madhyama, Gandhara, Rishabha, Shadja etc. on one hand and Prathama, 
Dwitiya, Tritiya, Chaturtha etc. on the other as mentioned in the following 
shlokas. 
यः सामगानां ूथमः स वेणोमध्यमः र् ःवरः | यो िद्वतीयःस गान्धारःततीयःत्व ृ षभः ृ ःमतः ृ ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-5-1] 
The first note of Sama- singers is known as the Madhyama swara of a flute. 
The second one is the Gandhara of a flute. The third one is known as the 
Rishabha of a flute [Bhise, U., p. 37]. 
चतुथर्ः षड्ज इत्याहुःपञ्चमो धैवतो भवेत | ् षष्ठो िनषादो िवज्ञेयः सप्तमः पञ्चमः ःमतः ृ || 2 ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-5-2] 
The fourth note is regarded as Shadja of the flute while the fifth one is 
known as Dhaivata. The sixth should be known as Nishada and the last 
one, the seventh one is considered as Panchama [Bhise, U., p. 37]. 
24 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Above-mentioned two shlokas give us ancient/ archaic order of swaras
which appears to be the most ancient way of arranging swaras in 
descending order on a flute. However, when Veena (a string instrument) is 
used, the currently practiced ascending arrangement of swaras is 
applicable. It seems that those days `Sama’ singers were accompanied by 
flute. Also the reference to flute might have been provided to give proper 
understanding of swaras used in Samagana. 
ःवरात्ःवरं संबमःतुःवरसिन्धरनुल्बणम | ् अिविच्छन्नं समं कुयार्त्सूआमछायातपोपमम || ्
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-6-18] 
While going from one musical note to another the transition between the 
two notes should be indistinct, unbroken and normal. It should be made 
uniform, continuous as the joining of light-shadow and the sunlight [Bhise, 
U., p. 97]. 
Melody has been a special quality of Indian music from ancient times. 
Melody needs smooth transition from one note to another. It should be 
gradual, even and steady as a day is transformed into night through 
evening and a night is transformed into a day through morning. Both 
evening and morning are called the `sandhikala’ (twilight or transitory 
phases). Transition between two notes should be so smooth and gradual. 
This is very important because as it will be discussed later, that shrutis are 
rendered at the beginning or at the end of such a melodic transition if 
appropriate in Samagana. Rendering shrutis is a special act. Shrutis are to 
be rendered at the end of significant melodic transitions from one swara
to the other following certain rules described at appropriate place in this 
monograph. Routine musical phrases are rendered without shrutis. To 
achieve this one needs to understand the possible mistakes in melodic 
rendering of swaras. 
अनागतमितबान्तं िविच्छन्नं िवषमाहतम | ् तन्वन्तमिःथतान्तं च वजर्येत् कषर्णंबुधः ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-6-19] 
A knowledgeable person should avoid the mere extensions of a swara
while joining two notes. It amounts to saying that the distinction between 
one note and the other should be very smooth. The transition should not 
be noticeable. While doing this, one needs to extend the note but this act 
of extending should not be faulty. There are six types of faults possible 
which are mentioned here. These are as follows [Bhise, U., p. 97]. 
25 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Anagata: This defect arises when the next note is touched prematurely 
before completing the previous note. 
Atikranta: It is called skipping over the in between note/s. 
Vichchhinna: The continuity is broken. 
Vishamahata: This involves giving irregular stress during the transition. 
Tanvat: Extending for more or undesirable duration. 
Asthitanta: Ending a note to indefinite point. 
This description is very important to understand the phenomenon of 
shruti. While employing shrutis the performer has to be careful about 
these faults and avoid them. 
ःवराः ःथानाच्च्युतो यःतुःवं ःथानमितवतर्ते | िवःवरं सामगा ॄूयुिवरक्तिमित र् वीिणनः ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-6-20] 
The notes that deviate from their places are called Viswara by the singers 
of Saman and Virakta by the players of a Veena [Bhise, U., pp. 97-98]. 
This shloka suggests that a specific swara has to be used with due 
accuracy indicating that the places or locations of swaras are fixed. We 
know that Bharata gives clear description of swaras and shrutis in 
Natyashastra and as it is being argued in this paper, Bharata’s shrutis were 
equal temperament and swaras had fixed positions. Although Naradiya 
Shiksha is considered as older than Natyashastra we find many concepts 
and terms common to both the treatises. Some scholars argue that many 
of such common terms was a later addition to Naradiya Shiksha, still one 
cannot assume that all the common terms are the later additions. There 
must be substantial musical vocabulary that is shared by both the 
treatises. The terms such as Grama, Raga, Murchchhana, Swara, and Shruti
etc. are splendidly used in Naradiya Shiksha so much so, that it appears 
that it was a part of the musical vocabulary of the ancient times. These 
terms are so innately connected with each other that one cannot exist 
without the others. So in all probability Naradiya Shiksha and 
Natyashastra of Bharata share the same common musical vocabulary. So 
it is most likely that swara and shruti positions were fixed (fixed in 
relation to each other in an octave) those days. This shloka [Naradiya 
Shiksha:1-6-20], goes by this premise without giving elaborate details 
26 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
while Natyashastra gives elaborate details of the swara and shruti
positions. This will help in bringing out clarity in understanding the 
following shlokas from Naradiya Shiksha.
4.1 Definition of Shruti
After introducing swaras, the next important reference occurs in the sixth 
section of the first chapter of Naradiya Shiksha and that is about shrutis. 
The following shloka is the frequently referred shloka from Naradiya 
Shiksha. This most celebrated shloka is often quoted to suggest that 
Naradiya Shiksha does not give the precise definition of shruti. But in fact 
this shloka illustrates the subtle nature of shrutis. It also metaphorically 
suggests that it is not easy to master shrutis. It says shrutis are like 
footprints of fish and birds that do not leave any traces in water and sky 
respectively. This description is not a definition of shrutis but is a 
metaphorical description of shrutis. Many scholars have attempted 
various interpretations in this regard to the extent some of the scholars 
argued that Naradiya Shiksha does not give any clear meaning of shrutis. 
The shloka is as follows. 
यथाप्सुचरताम ्मागोर् मीनानाम ्नोपलभ्यते | आकाशेवा िवहंगानां तद्वत्ःवरगता ौुितः ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-6-16] 
The footprints of fish in the water and the traces of bird’s path in the sky 
are not easy to track. In a similar way shrutis in a musical note are not 
easily perceivable [Bhise, U., p. 97]. 
Bhatta Shobhakara in his description says that navigation of fish and birds 
in the water or in the air is natural (and intuitive). Similarly while 
rendering musical notes during Samagana composition; shrutis are 
employed effortlessly (and intuitively) by the singers [Narada, p. 35]. 
Shrutis are not shown discretely because impact of Samagana is more 
important than highlighting the shrutis. Thus it may be said that use of 
shruti in music is so natural and involuntary that one does not need any 
efforts to employ them. On the other hand, if one tries to deliberately and 
consciously use them then such a rendering will be very difficult and 
sound artificial. 
Interestingly, the next shloka is very rarely referred by the scholars as 
compared to this shloka. The next shloka again metaphorically suggests 
27 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
that one can master the shrutis with right efforts in right direction. It says 
that shrutis are not hypothetical or as slippery as the footsteps of fish or 
birds but can be understood and mastered with right efforts in right 
direction. 
यथा दधिन सिपर्ः ःयात्काष्ठःथो वायथानलः | ूयत्नेनोपल्भ्येत तद्वत्ःवरगता ौुितः || 
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-6-17 ] 
However, as one can extract ghee from the curds or create fire out of wood 
with special efforts, in a similar fashion if one makes some efforts, one can 
easily perceive shrutis in musical notes [Bhise, U., p. 97].. 
As mentioned in the previous shloka, rendering of shrutis happens 
intuitively but if one makes extra efforts to understand how they are 
rendered and analyze them then it is possible to extract shrutis from 
swaras. Even for the performers as well as the listeners it is possible. The 
next few shlokas are highly important to understand the subtleties of 
rendering shrutis. 
ःवरिवशेषौितःूयोगाथ ु मवँयमवधारणीय र् ेत्युच्यते---
[Bhatta Shobhakara in Narada, p.39].
Bhatta Shobhakara describes shruti as `swara vishesha’. It means that 
shrutis are special aspects or qualities of a swara that are necessary to 
enhance the quality of a performance or presentation of a Samagana
composition. Shruti is a subtle sonar quality of a swara. Shruti is so special 
that it is used judiciously and parsimoniously at appropriate places. 
Shrutis are tonal flavors or intonations used at the end of legato or `meend’
like effects in special swara-phrases to enhance consonant relationships of 
swaras. This point will be explained in later sections. 
The Kaundinyayan School of Samaveda, on the other hand, defines shruti
as special element of a swara or special qualities of musical sound. The 
traditional shloka or karika of this school is as follows. 
ूथमौवणाच ्शब्दः ौूयते॑ःवमाऽकः | सा ौुितः संपिरज्ञेया ःवरावयवलक्षणा ||
ौुतः ःवरुप माऽेण हीनोऽनुरणनेन तु | नादः ौुितः ःयादःयाःतुभेदा द्वािवंशितः ःमताः ृ ||
As per Kaundinyayan tradition, shruti is an important element or aspect of 
a swara. It’s a sound that we hear immediately after its production and 
sustains for a very short period. Shruti is a pure sound, an essential part of 
28 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
the swara and does not have a quality of resonance. There are twenty two
types of shrutis [Kaundinyayan, S. p. 19]. 
The above shloka is not from Naradiya Shiksha. It belongs to the 
Kaundinyayan tradition. It tries to distinguish shruti from swara. Swara is 
considered as a sound that sustains on its own and has a quality of 
resonance. It rules the hearts and minds of the audience and provides 
ecstatic enjoyment and fulfillment [Kaundinyayan, S. p. 19]. However, here 
it is said that shruti does not have the quality of resonance which is a 
differentiating criterion. So shruti and swara can be distinguished on the 
basis of the property of resonance. Swara has a resonating property while 
shruti does not have it. This description makes shruti very similar to a 
`kana swara’ or a grace note. The notion of shruti as commonly 
understood as microtone is an ancient concept but apart from that shruti
also has certain aesthetic and evocative qualities but does not have the 
property of resonance according to above description. 
The following verses from Naradiya Shiksha give thorough and complex 
description about the concept of shruti prevalent in those days especially 
in the context of Samaveda tradition. Naradiya Shiksha is primarily 
considered as an instructional manual to understand Samavedic practices. 
One finds striking difference between the description of shrutis in 
Naradiya Shiksha and the description of shrutis from Natyashastra and 
Sangita Ratnakar. Although, the phenomenon of shrutis or microtones was 
well-acknowledged and recognized by all these three treatises, their 
description and theorization was done in different ways. There are many 
points of differences in the description of shrutis as well as similarities. 
Naradiya Shiksha does not mention twenty two shrutis. It classifies shrutis
into five types as Aayata, Madhya, Mrudu, Dipta and Karuna. It is certain 
that shrutis are understood there as subtle shades or microtonal 
variations of a swara. These micro variations are classified into five types. 
On the other hand Bharata’s Natyashastra clearly mentions the number of 
shrutis as twenty two pitch positions in an octave and at least fourteen of 
them can attain the status of a swara in different contexts. Antar Gandhara
and Kakali Nishada are the most prominent examples of such instances. 
4.2 Characterizing Shruti 
The description of shrutis in Naradiya Shiksha begins with providing a 
name-list of the types of shrutis saying that a Samaveda teacher should 
29 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
have thorough knowledge of these varieties of shrutis. As mentioned 
earlier, according to Naradiya Shiksha, shrutis are important and special 
aspects of a swara. Naradiya Shiksha mentions five types of shrutis as 
follows. 
दीप्तायताकरुणानाम ् मृदमध्यमयोःतथा ु | ौुतीनां योऽिवशेषज्ञो न स आचायर् उच्यते ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-9] 
One who does not know the distinction between the shrutis such as Dipta, 
Aayata, Karuna, Mrudu and Madhyama is not considered as a teacher of 
Samaveda music. Thus this stanza enlists five types of shrutis [Bhise, U., p. 
99]. 
Shiksha treatises are the instructional manuals and compilations of then 
prevalent knowledge in a specific area. The style and treatment of these 
treatises is highly compact and codified. The next few shlokas from 
Naradiya Shiksha are a good example of such compactness. The above 
shloka mentions a list of five shrutis but does not mention that these are 
five different types of shrutis. However, the way further description goes 
on it becomes clear from the usage that these are not mere names of 
shrutis but these represent five types of shrutis. The next few shlokas give 
further description and associates shruti-types with appropriate swaras. 
दीप्ता मन्िेिद्वतीयेच ू चतुथेर्तथैव च | अितःवारेतृतीयेच बू ष्टे तुकरुणा ौुितः || [Naradiya 
Shiksha:1-7-10]. 
Dipta shruti resides in Mandra swara (Nishada) and Dwitiya swara
(Gandhara), Prathama swara (Madhyama) and Chaturtha swara (Shadja), 
Atiswarya swara (Dhaivata)and Tritiya swara (Rishabha), while Karuna 
shruti resides in Krushta swara (Panchama) [Bhise, U., p. 100]. 
Except Krushta i.e. Panchama swara all the other six swaras have a Dipta 
shruti. It also suggests that this shloka is explaining the `swara sthapana’
or describing how to identify swara positions. Interestingly, pairing of 
Mandra and Dwitiya, Prathama and Chaturtha, as well as Atiswarya and 
Tritiya indicates that these relationships of swaras are natural tools to 
establish and cross-check swara positions. All these pairs are governed by 
Shadja-Madhyama Bhava or Shadja-Panchama Bhava. Swara resonates at 
a consonant pitch position in relation to the position of Shadja swara. 
Once the Shadja is established other swaras can be established on a Veena
like instrument. On a flute one can experience the exact resonating swara
30 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
position in similar way by adjusting finger positions. Dipta shruti is the 
blossoming and resonating pitch position of a swara (though it may 
slightly shift from its natural pitch position). Therefore, description of 
shruti begins with description of Dipta shruti. By following natural 
principles of consonance one can experience the Dipta shruti of a 
particular swara. 
As a part of ongoing saga of codification in Naradiya Shiksha, this shloka is 
very interesting because it uses a letter `pra’ (`ू’) in a cryptic way. 
Although it is not mentioned in the shloka, Bhatta Shobhakara mentions 
that the Mrudu shruti resides in the Prathama swara. However, there is no 
mention of it in the shloka. On the other hand the Kaundinyayan tradition 
believes that instead of Mrudu shruti, the shruti that resides in the 
Prathama swara is a Dipta shruti since the alphabet `Pra’ in the shloka
stands for Prathama swara. The letter `Pra’ in the shloka appears to be 
cryptic and special according to them [Kaundinyayan, S., p. 92]. 
Narayanaswami Dikshit who wrote explanatory commentary on Bhatta 
Shobhakara defends Bhatta Shobhakara’s statement. Accordingly, he says 
the letter `Pra’ stands for Prathama swara that means Dipta shruti also 
resides in Prathama swara. However, taking into account the statement 
`prathamena mrudu smrutah’ that comes in the thirteenth shloka of the 
seventh kandika of Naradiya Shiksha (1-7-13), which means the shruti of 
Prathama swara is Mrudu. Therefore Bhatta Shobhakara’s view appears 
correct. This view is certainly debatable but it may be asserted that both 
types of shrutis can reside in Prathama swara. As we will discuss in further 
sections, a swara can have multiple shrutis in different contexts. As it is 
already mentioned, shruti is a special sound quality of a swara. A swara
can have multiple sound qualities. The eleventh shloka of the seventh 
kandika of Naradiya Shiksha (1-7-11) for instance, mentions that there are 
additional shrutis for Dwitiya swara. 
These shlokas are very important because they give an illustrative 
example of a Dwitiya swara to explain various types of shrutis. Dwitiya 
swara is a representative of all swaras. Whatever is explained about 
Dwitiya swara is applicable to rest of the seven swaras though this is not 
clearly mentioned anywhere. These are the ways of codification in ancient 
treatises. However, Bhatta Shobhakara in his commentary does not 
consider this aspect. Even many scholars do not look at these shlokas from 
this perspective. For instance, Dr. Usha Bhise in her introduction to the 
critical commentary of Naradiya Shiksha has mentioned that there is a loss 
of verses regarding the description about other swaras. Dr. Bhise says, “... 
31 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
After this additional shrutis of Dwitiya are mentioned in details. The 
remaining six notes are not referred to. This indicates a further loss of 
several verses”. [Bhise, U., p. 4]. Thus this point of view is debatable again. 
Actually it appears from the flow of shlokas that the description about 
Dwitiya swara is an illustration. What applies to Dwitiya swara is 
applicable to rest of the swaras. If there are specific differences then such 
differences are specifically mentioned. For instance in the previous shloka
it is mentioned that there resides a Karuna shruti in Krushta swara. It 
means that there is something special about Karuna shruti. Krushta
literally means `cry’. The Krushta swara is produced on the flute as 
Panchama/ (Teevra Madhyama) but since the air flow is forceful it 
produces sharp sound. It means if the shruti has sharpness/shrillness in it 
then it is called a Karuna shruti. But this does not mean that Krushta swara
does not have a Dipta shruti or other shrutis. 
ौुतयोऽन्या िद्वतीयःय मृदमध्यायताः ु ःमताः ृ | तासामिप तुवआयािम लक्षणािन पृथक्पृथक् ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-11] 
There are three additional shrutis that reside in Dwitiya swara. Their 
names are Mrudu, Madhya and Aayata. The detailed description is given 
separately [Bhise, U., p. 100]. 
Thus a swara can have multiple shrutis. Dwitiya swara has Dipta shruti as 
mentioned in previous shloka. Apart from that there are three more 
shrutis to it. This description is not restricted to Dwitiya swara alone. It 
means that all the swaras can have additional shrutis. The description then 
proceeds further by defining Aayata, Madhya and Mrudu shrutis. Thus so 
far one can say that Prathama, Dwitiya, Tritiya, Chaturtha, Mandra, 
Atiswarya swaras have four shrutis each- Dipta, Aayata, Madhya, and 
Mrudu. The Krushta swara has Karuna shruti and Aayata, Madhya, and 
Mrudu shrutis. So as a conclusion it may be said that apart from Dipta
quality, all the seven swaras can have three additional qualities- Aayata, 
Madhya and Mrudu as their additional qualities. Except Krushta, all the 
remaining six swaras can have Dipta shruti as their quality. The Krushta 
swara has Karuna shruti may be along with Dipta.
आयतात्वं भवेन्नीचे मृदत्वु ं तुिवपयर्ये | ःवे ःवरे मध्यमात्वं तुतत्समीआय ूयोजयेत || ्
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-12] 
When one moves from Dwitiya swara to its lower swaras the shruti of 
Dwitiya swara becomes Aayata. On the other hand when one moves from 
32 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Dwitiya swara to higher notes, the shruti of Dwitiya swara becomes Mrudu. 
However, when a Dwitiya swara is followed by Dwitiya swara that means 
it is repeated, the shruti of Dwitiya swara is called Madhya. Shrutis should 
be employed in a swara keeping in mind this phenomenon [Bhise, U., p. 
100]. 
It is assumed that when a swara is at its natural position, then it is 
considered as belonging to Madhya shruti jati or Madhya type of shruti. 
Sound of such a shruti is normal, neutral and of medium volume. When we 
shift from one swara to another, to maintain the continuity, a subtle shift 
towards higher side or lower side takes place. When this shift is towards 
the lower side it is said that the swara has shifted from Madhya position to 
Mrudu position. Mrudu tone of a shruti is very soft, subtle, delicate and 
emotive which is achievable through modulation. If there is a shift 
towards higher side then it is said that swara has shifted from Madhya
type to Aayata type. Aayata tone of a shruti is slightly sharper, pointed, 
louder and forceful due to modulation. These three types of shruti give 
importance to change of a pitch. So micro-level shift or change in a 
frequency due to modulation that evokes emotive feeling is a defining 
criterion for deciding the type of a shruti according to Naradiya Shiksha. 
It is mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha that while rendering swaras one 
should move from one swara to another swara without breaking the 
continuity. In Western music it is called legato effect. In Indian music it 
happens during taking a meend or a soonth. Similarly raga-specific musical 
phrases are formed with the swaras having pleasing relationships among 
them such as Shadaj-Pancham Bhava or Shadja-Madhyama Bhava etc. 
Bhatta Shobhakara in his commentary calls this as `Swarantara’, 
consonant relationship or musically significant distance between two 
swaras. In such cases every swara is related to its previous swara by a 
particular ratio. In musical terms it may be said that the next swara is 
derived from its previous swaras by following musical reasoning or aural 
logic. In such transition from one swara to the other swara, a very subtle 
shift takes place. The following discussion takes into account all such 
factors. It is interesting to note that Bhatta Shobhakara most of the times, 
mentions about Swarantara instead of shrutyantara. On the other hand for 
describing the consonant relations among swaras Bharata uses the 
terminology of `shrutyantara’. 
One important aspect of melodious transition is that a shift from one 
swara to the next is smooth and continuous but this shift is not like a 
33 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
straight line. The shift is like a curve. As per the above discussion when 
one moves from a swara to higher swara the shruti type of the previous 
swara is defined as Mrudu shruti. This Mrudu shruti is not higher pitched 
than the swara; however, it is slightly lower than the pitch of the swara. 
For example, when a musician moves from Shadja swara to say Gandhara 
swara, the movement from one swara to another is not straight. Actually, a 
singer first takes few lower microtones of the Shadja swara and then 
embarks upon the higher side towards Gandhara. The lower microtones of 
a swara which are rendered by the singer are considered as the Mrudu 
shruti according to Naradiya Shiksha. The opposite happens when a singer 
goes from a particular swara to its lower swara. Therefore, pitch of a 
Mrudu shruti is lower than the pitch of the swara while the pitch of the 
Aayata shruti is higher than the pitch of the swara. So the natural pitch of 
the swara is called Madhya shruti while a pitch position few microtones on 
the lower side is called a Mrudu shruti and few microtones on higher side 
is called the Aayata shruti. Abhinavagupta while defining the `Pramana 
Shruti’ in Natyashastra, describes the Mardavatva (quality of softness of a 
musical note) and Aayatatva (quality of sharpness of a musical note) in 
the same manner i.e. in terms of lower and higher pitch respectively 
[Abhinavagupta in Bharata, pp. 21-22]. Even today the lower tones of a 
swara are called soft notes or Komal swaras and the higher tones are 
called sharp notes or Teevra swaras. This is specifically explained here 
because literal translation of the above shloka would be exactly opposite 
and misleading. A non-musician can make such a mistake in translating 
this shloka. The shloka says `Aayatatvam bhaved neeche’ means Aayata is 
towards lower side of the swara but it is not correct since actual process 
of musical rendering while connecting two swaras is very subtle as 
explained earlier. Shlokas from Naradiya Shiksha carry cryptic and 
musically dense content. Even Bhatta Shobhakara’s commentary is also 
equally dense and musically loaded. To interpret these texts correctly one 
should take into account the actual musical rendering practices of the 
swaras and not just the literal meaning. 
In the case of Aayata, Madhya and Mrudu shrutis, the criteria for deciding 
their status was their relative pitch position (of course the intonations and 
emotions do have their role there). Secondly, when two notes are 
connected or rendered one after another, Aayata, Madhya and Mrudu 
shrutis are assigned to the first note appropriately. However, in the rest of 
the shlokas it is highlighted that for describing the quality of Dipta shruti
the criteria that are used are different. Description of Dipta shruti is 
always in terms of musical relation with other swaras or the `Swarantara’. 
34 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
When the tone of a swara is voluminous, pleasing, resonating and 
consonant then such a shruti is called Dipta shruti. It is supposed to be 
based on some of the consonances (such as Shadja-Panchama Bhava, 
Shadja-Madhyama bhava, Shadja-Gandhara Bhava etc.). The word Dipta
literally means `bright’, `shining’, or blossoming. When swaras have a 
relationship based on consonances then such swaras have the quality 
called Dipta. Secondly, Dipta shruti is assigned to the second swara when 
two swaras are connected. Dipta is not assigned to the first swara. This is a 
major distinguishing factor in characterizing Dipta shruti and Aayata, 
Madhya and Mrudu shrutis. The Karuna shruti is a special case. This 
comparison gives more clarity about Dipta shruti. Dipta shruti is certainly 
not characterized by only pitch position. It is characterized by its aesthetic 
and evocative quality due to swarantara (consonance). In this sense if 
swara is rendered at its normal pitch position with normal sonar qualities 
then it is called Madhya shruti as mentioned earlier. However, if it is 
rendered at same pitch position but augmented with resonating and 
evocative impact it is called Dipta shruti. In the process, the pitch position 
of the swara may shift a little bit or it may not shift depending on the 
previous swara and consonance that is rendered. In that case a Dipta 
shruti can have a quality of modulated softness making it towards 
Mrudushruti or can have sharpness making it tilting towards Aayata
position. It may be termed as `Mrudu-bhuta Dipta or Aayata-bhuta Dipta’
respectively. Bhatta Shobhakara uses the phrase `Mrudu-bhuta Dipta’ in 
his commentary [Narada, p. 40]. 
The Karuna shruti may also carry similar qualities except that it is sharper, 
emotional, and passionate and generates pathos through modulations. So 
when a tone of the shruti is modulated to generate pathos then it is 
Karuna shruti. The three types of shruti, namely, Mrudu, Madhya and 
Aayata are understood by their pitch positions mainly (Mrudu has 
qualities of modulated softness), while Dipta is characterized by its 
qualities of consonance and modulation. The Karuna shruti is special in 
the sense that it is understood by its quality of sharpness, modulation and 
ability to generate pathos. Specifically it is mentioned in the earlier shloka
that Panchama has a Karuna shruti [Narada, p. 40]. It may be inferred 
from this statement that the Shadja-Panchama Bhava leads to Karuna 
shruti. The other consonances may lead to Dipta shruti. 
35 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
िद्वतीये िवरताया तुबुष्टश्च परतो भवेत | ् दीप्तां तां तु िवजानीयात् ूथमेन मृदःःमु ता ृ ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-13] 
When one begins with Krushta swara and finally reaches Dwitiya swara
and rests there then in such a case the shruti of Dwitiya swara would be 
Dipta. If one begins with Prathama swara and then finally rests in Dwitiya
then the shruti of Dwitiya would be Mrudu [Bhise, U., p. 100]. 
The swarantara between Krushta (Panchama) and Dwitiya swara
(Bharata’s Gandhara) may be called Panchama-Gandhara swarantara
while swarantara between Prathama swara (Madhyama) and Dwitiya
(Bharata’s Gandhara) may be called Panchama-Madhyama swarantara. So 
one can infer that if the swara distance between two connected swaras is 
equal or less than Panchama-Madhyama swarantara then the shruti of the 
next swara would be Mrudu shruti. On the other hand if there is a swaradistance such as Panchama-Gandhara swarantara between two swaras
then the shruti of the next swara would be Dipta shruti. PanchamaGandhara swarantara is larger swara-distance than the PanchamaMadhyama swarantara. So any swarantara that is larger than the 
Panchama-Madhyama swarantara will lead to Dipta shruti. In his 
commentary Bhatta Shobhakara specifically uses the term `Swarantara’
while elaborating on this shloka. Swarantara here certainly means 
consonance. 
However, Bhatta Shobhakara’s interpretation of this shloka (Naradiya 
Shiksha: 1-7-13) is slightly different. According to him Dwitiya swara has a 
Dipta shruti but the Prathama swara will have Mrudu shruti. Probably, 
because the swara distance between Krushta and Prathama is of 
Panchama-Madhyama swarantara. The distance between Bharata’s 
Panchama-Madhyama and Bharata’s Madhyama-Gandhara is equal. 
However, this may not be the only reason. It appears, even though there is 
no substantial reference, that the swara Madhyama will always have 
Mrudu shruti. In the earlier shloka (Naradiya Shiksha: 1-7-10) [Narada, p. 
40] in his commentary Bhatta Shobhakara says that Prathama swara has 
Mrudu shruti though it is not mentioned in the shloka. So it seems that as 
per practices during those times, the Prathama swara would always have 
Mrudu shruti. As per this inference the Shadja-Madhyama Bhava will 
always lead to Mrudu shruti. However, this inference does not have any 
strong support. There is another way to look at it. The statement, 
`prathamena’ ' mrudu smrutah’ (Naradiya Shiksha: 1-7-13) [Narada, p. 41] 
is understood as the shruti of Prathama swara is Mrudu shruti according to 
36 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Bhatta Shobhakara. Still the rule of Panchama-Madhyama swarantara
remains intact because the distance between Krushta and Prathama swara
is also of Panchama-Madhyama swarantara. Actually, this statement if 
interpreted in the context, it means that if one begins with Prathama 
swara and then finally rests in Dwitiya swara then the shruti of Dwitiya
would be Mrudu as interpreted earlier. 
अऽैव िवरता या तु चतुथेर्न ूवतर्ते | तथा मन्िे भवेद्दीप्ता साम्नश्चैव समापने || 
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-14] 
As mentioned in the previous shloka if one begins with Chaturtha or 
Mandra and finally rests in the Dwitiya swara then the shruti of Dwitiya 
would be Dipta. Similarly if the swara occurs at the termination of the 
Saman rendering or as the last swara of Saman then its shruti would be 
Dipta. 
Again the swarantara (distance between two swaras) between the 
Chaturtha swara (Shadja) and Dwitiya (Bharata’s Gandhara) is more than 
Panchama-Madhyama swarantara so the shruti of Dwitiya qualifies to be 
Dipta shruti. Similarly, the swarantara between Mandra swara (Bharata’s 
Nishada) and the Dwitiya (Bharata’s Gandhara) is more than PanchamaMadhyama swarantara. 
Alternately, Bhatta Shobhakara has a different interpretation of this 
shloka which is not strictly grammatically correct but it could be right in 
the context of actual practice. He says, “chaturthe sware avasthita shrutih 
sa Dipta mrudubhavatiswarantaranugamane sati (anyatha) Dipta bhavati” 
[Narada, p. 41]. It means shruti that rests at Chaturtha swara should be 
Dipta shruti due to the swara-distance between Krushta swara and the 
Chaturtha swara however; this Dipta is with Mrudu tonality because it 
rests on the Chaturtha swara which is actually the Shadja swara. So can 
one draw a conclusion that Shadja will always have Mrudu shruti? In 
actual practice even today when a Shadja swara is rendered few 
frequencies lower than its actual frequency then it gives the maximum 
rich effect. He further says that if the shruti rests on Mandra swara 
(Bharata’s Nishada) then there should be Dipta shruti due to the 
swarantara between Krushta and Mandra swara. Rightly the swarantara
between Krushta and the Mandra swara is of more than PanchamaMadhyama swarantara. Finally he says if shruti rests at the end of the 
Sama composition then that swara will have Dipta shruti (irrespective of 
swarantara). The last resting swara is supposed to be the `nyasa’ swara
37 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
(resting swara). So the shruti of a nyasa swara is always Dipta shruti. Thus 
Bhatta Shobhakara has described all the critical swara positions and their 
respective shrutis. 
Bhatta Shobhakara’s interpretation does not match with Dr. Bhise’s 
interpretation at many places. Dr. Bhise has always tried to follow the 
Paninian grammarian tradition. She has attempted more a grammatical 
translation of Naradiya Shiksha. [Bhise, U., p. 101]. On the other hand 
Bhatta Shobhakara’s interpretation does not stick strictly to grammatical 
tradition. It takes into account prevalent Samagana practicing tradition as 
well as `not so strictly grammatical’ language usage. `Prayoga sharanah 
Vaiyyakaranah’, that means grammarian bows down to the `language 
usage’ (practice/ experimentation). So it is suggested that though Bhatta 
Shobhakara’s interpretation is not in strict conformity with grammarian 
tradition, it is still recommended that one needs to accept it, as it might 
have been in tune with the prevalent practices of Samagana in those days. 
So also his views not really affect the earlier mentioned two rules: rule of 
Panchama-Madhyama swarantara and the rule of Panchama-Gandhara 
swarantara. At other instances Bhatta Shobhakara has just mentioned few 
exceptions to these rules. 
Second point is even more important. As stated earlier Naradiya Shiksha
has a certain type of codification and therefore the mention of Dwitiya 
swara in the relevant shlokas is understood as an illustration. Whatever is 
applicable to Dwitiya swara is applicable to all other swaras. Bhatta 
Shobhakara, however, does not look at it in this way. He considers each 
swara- Dwitiya, Prathama, Chaturtha and Mandra as separate instances or 
cases in relation to Krushta swara. These are representative rules of 
swarantaras for assigning shrutis to swara rendering. The rendering of 
remaining swaras such as Tritiya, and Atiswarya (and even Krushta) can 
be done by following the thus explained rules of swarantara. Probably the 
Krushta swara can have special treatment since it is earlier mentioned 
that the shruti of Krushta swara is Karuna. It may be the case that ShadjaPanchama swarantara leads to Karuna shruti but this is not mentioned 
explicitly in the text. Very important principle of rendering shrutis is 
emerging out of this discussion and that is, shrutis should be rendered 
only in the case of above-mentioned swarantaras. Shrutis should be 
rendered in special occasions of consonant relationships. It is evident that 
these consonant relationships lead to legato effect or melodic `meend’
effect in Indian music. In such a case always at least two swaras are 
involved. For the starting swara one of the Mrudu, Madhya or Aayata 
38 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
shruti is appropriately assigned while for the last/ resting swara Dipta 
shruti is assigned (contextually it can be Mrudu-Dipta or Dipta-Aayata) 
following laws of swarantara and various other rules that are described in 
next few shlokas. 
नािवरते ौुितं कुयार्त्ःवरयोवािपर् चान्तरे | न च ॑ःवे च दीघेर् च न चािप घुटसंिज्ञके ||
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-15] 
The shruti should not be pronounced before the end of the musical note, 
not even in between the notes. Shruti should not be pronounced before 
short or long syllable or the special syllables called `ghuta’ syllables 
[Bhise, U., p. 101]. 
It means shruti should be employed when a musical note reaches its final 
destination and rests at specific desired swara. This needs some more 
explanation. When two swaras are melodically connected then shruti
should be pronounced when one rests on the second/ resting swara. 
There might be many swaras during this transition but shruti should not 
be pronounced for these in-between swaras. Such a transition may involve 
many swaras or consonants, vowels or special syllables called `ghuta’. All 
these are part of the transition so shruti should not be assigned to them. 
To sum up shruti should be pronounced only at the end i.e. the resting 
swara of the melodic transition and not in-between. However, Bhatta 
Shobhakara in his commentary mentions that the `pluta’ swaras
(prolonged swaras) can have appropriate shrutis employed (he is 
mentioning an exception to the rule). 
िद्विवधा गितः पदान्ताः िःथितसंिधः सहोंमिभः | पञ्चःवेतेषुःथानेषुिवज्ञेयंघुटसंिज्ञकम || 16 ्
|| [Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-16] 
The `ghuta’ syllables occur at five places in a recitation. There are two 
types of `gatis’: the first gati occurs when `i’ sound is converted into `ai’
sound in a sandhi and the other gati is when `u’ sound is converted in `au’
sound in a sandhi. Both the pronunciations are called `ghuta’. The other 
three varieties of `ghuta’ are as follows. When three fricatives- syllables-
`sha’, `shha’, and `sa’ are inflected in a word or a `pada’ or in a half verse 
then these three syllables are considered as `ghuta’[Bhise, U., p. 101]. 
ःवरान्तरा िवरतािन ॑ःवदीघर्घुटािन च | ःवरःथानेंवशेषािण ौुितवत् ःवरतो भवेत || ्
[Naradiya Shiksha:1-7-17] 
39 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
As mentioned in previous shlokas shrutis should be employed if and only if 
the musical note reaches its final resting destination. Shrutis should not be 
employed in between or when in the process of transition. This situation 
arises in melodic phrases where Samagana singer brings the legato effect 
while moving from one swara to the next swara where the next swara is 
the desired concluding point of the phrase. 
Dr. Bhise has translated this shloka as follows: “The interval between 
notes [intervening `shrutis’], long syllables and the ghuta - all these 
without exception should be expressed by shruti-like notes [in transition] 
when they are in the place of a musical note”[Bhise, U., pp. 101-102]. 
On the other hand Kaundinyayan tradition interprets it in a slightly 
different way. They say all short vowels, long vowels and `ghuta’ syllables 
can be there in the second swara but if that swara is not a resting or 
desired concluding point of a legato phrase then Dipta etc. shrutis should 
not be employed. Normal swara itself represents the shruti
[Kaundinyayan, S., p. 97]. One can manage just with a regular swara
rendering. So there is a difference of opinion. Dr. Bhise says that shrutilike expression is required at such places while the Kaundinyayan
tradition says that normal swara rendering is sufficient. 
However, Bhatta Shobhakara has more profound interpretation. He says 
all the swaras, consonants, short vowels, long vowels and `ghuta’ swaras
should not be expressed by shruti if they are not at the desired resting 
points. In all such places shruti-like expression of a swara itself is 
sufficient. The phrase, `shruti-like expression of a swara’, is very 
interesting. Bhatta Shobhakara is suggesting here that swara can be 
expressed as a swara, or as a shruti belonging to any of the five types and 
apart from that a swara can be expressed in a third way that is un-defined 
or something like a shruti but not a shruti proper. So in a way he is 
indicating that when a swara is rendered as a swara then it should be 
rendered as a Madhya shruti in a specific way at specific position. The five 
types of shrutis should be expressed in a well-defined way with a 
precision as mentioned earlier. While there can be a different way of 
rendering swara other than these five types which might be different but 
suits the occasion and may have implicit consonance or some kind of 
modulation. In all possibilities Bhatta Shobhakara’s view appears to be 
more precise and also throws light on the subtleties of shruti rendering in 
Samagana practices. This again reiterates that there are strict restrictions 
on shruti rendering. Swaras should be rendered at their normal positions 
40 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
for common rendering. Shrutis are employed only in the case of consonant 
swarantaras and rendered in legato or melodic fashion (starting swara
and/ or at the resting swara) and that too following above-mentioned 
constraints. Thus shruti rendering was a special phenomenon. This is a 
major difference between the concept of shruti in Naradiya Shiksha and 
the concept of shruti in Natyashastra. According to Natyashastra of 
Bharata, shrutis are the distinct pitch positions in an octave (this is 
discussed in the next part) and can attain the status of a swara. While as 
per Naradiya Shiksha, shrutis are the special sonar qualities of a swara
itself. 
दीप्तामुदात्तेजानीयाद्दीप्तां च ःविरतेिवदःु | अनुदात्तेमृदज्ञेर् ु या गान्धवेर्ौुितसंपदः || [Naradiya 
Shiksha:1-7-18] 
It should be known that there is a Dipta shruti in the Udatta swara and 
also in Swarita swara. There exists Mrudu shruti in the Anudatta swara. If 
this is followed properly then the performance of shruti rendering excels 
in Samagana or Gandharva gana [Bhise, U., p 102]. 
As Anudatta note is lowest note as compared to Udatta or Swarita, the 
singer always has to move in upward direction from Anudatta swara, 
therefore Anudatta swara will always have Mrudu shruti. For the Udatta
and Swarita a Dipta shruti is recommended because it fulfils the 
requirement of swarantara but apart from that they may have Aayata or 
Mrudu shrutis depending on the positional context, however, Naradiya 
Shiksha recommends Dipta shruti for Udatta and Swarita swaras. First of 
all it is important to note that the concept of shruti as discussed in 
Naradiya Shiksha is very special. From the above description and 
discussion, some profound rules can be inferred. These rules indicate that 
type of a shruti is decided on the basis of relationships between swaras
with each other. 
They are as follows. 
1. If you go from swara X towards its lower swara then the shruti of 
swara X would be Aayata shruti. 
2. If you go from swara X towards its higher swara then the shruti of 
swara X would be Mrudu shruti. 
3. If swara X is repeated again and again then the shruti of swara X 
would remain its natural shruti which is called Madhya shruti or 
Madhyama shruti. 
41 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
4. If swara Y is related to its previous swara X by the consonance 
larger than Krushta-Prathama swarantara i.e. PanchamaMadhyama Bhava then swara Y will have Dipta type of shruti. 
5. If swara Y is related to its previous swara X by the consonance 
equal or shorter than Krushta-Prathama swarantara i.e.
Panchama-Madhyama Bhava then swara Y will have Mrudu type 
of shruti. 
6. Shruti of Panchama is said to be of Karuna type. It means that if 
swara Y is related to its previous swara X by the consonance of 
Shadja-Panchama Bhava then swara Y will have Karuna type of 
shruti. It means that Shadja-Panchama Bhava leads to Karuna 
shruti (this is not clearly stated in Naradiya Shiksha). 
7. Similarly as per Bhatta Shobhakara, Shadja-Madhyama Bhava 
may lead to Mrudu shruti. Actually if swara Y is related to its 
previous swara X by the virtue of consonance of KrushthaChaturtha Bhava then swara Y will have Dipta type of shruti. 
However, if the swara Y happens to be a Madhyama swara then 
that Dipta shruti will shift a bit and will be called `Mrudu-Bhoota’ 
Dipta shruti. Interestingly, according to Kaundinyayan tradition 
shruti type of Madhyama swara in this case also is Dipta. In the 
original text of Naradiya Shiksha, the shruti of Prathama swara is 
not explicitly mentioned. 
8. Shruti of a Nyasa swara (last resting swara of a stanza or 
composition) is Dipta shruti. 
9. While transitioning from swara X to swara Y, shruti will not be 
employed during the `transition’, but only at the beginning or at 
the end of such a transition that is on the resting swara. 
10. As per Bhatta Shobhakara all the swaras, consonants, short 
vowels, long vowels and `ghuta’ swaras should not be expressed 
by shruti if they are not at the desired resting points. In all such 
places shruti-like expression of a swara itself is sufficient. 
11. If swara Y is a resting swara and rests on `pluta’ (prolonged) 
syllable then swara Y will have the appropriate shruti according 
to Bhatta Shobhakara. 
12. If swara X is Udatta or Swarita then its shruti would be Dipta
while if it is Anudatta then its shruti would be Mrudu. 
13. Shadja swara or the Chaturtha swara will have Mrudu shruti 
irrespective of the relations with other swaras according to 
Bhatta Shobhakara. 
42 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
14. Madhyama swara or the Prathama swara will have Mrudu shruti
irrespective of the relations with other swaras according to 
Bhatta Shobhakara. 
15. Shruti is a special sonar quality of a swara. It is to be rendered 
sparingly and parsimoniously to enhance melodic consonant 
relationships between swaras. Shrutis are not to be rendered for 
routine sequential swara phrases. 
Naradiya Shiksha does not give an explicit definition of shruti in the 
original text as seen earlier though Bhatta Shobhakara and later 
commentators provide the definition of shruti. Bhatta Shobhakara says 
that shrutis are known by their sonar qualities (Dhwani-vishesha) or the 
special quality of sound as mentioned earlier. Looking at its connection 
with categories of Rigvedic and Samavedic swaras such as Udatta, 
Anudatta and Swarita, it is fairly clear that Vedic swaras are understood in 
terms of certain sonar qualities called shrutis. All the sound `qualities’ 
present in Vedic swaras are understood as shrutis. Thus although there is 
no definition of shruti given in Naradiya Shiksha, one can infer that shrutis
are nothing but sonar qualities of Vedic swaras/ musical pitches. It is 
certain that the concept of shruti in Naradiya Shiksha was different from 
that of Natyashastra. Since the description from Naradiya Shiksha is 
supposed to be earlier than the Natyashastra, it has its due importance. 
 
43 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
5. SHRUTI IN NATYASHASTRA OF BHARATA 
Bharata’s Natyashastra does not give a clear definition of the term shruti. 
Though Bharata is very particular about defining important concepts such 
as Vadi, Samvadi, Vivadi and other concepts in Natyashastra, somehow he 
has not given a clear definition of the term shruti. There is a contextual 
description of shrutis and even Bharata has described a highly 
sophisticated method of demonstrating shrutis in the experiment called 
`Shruti Nidarshanam’. Elaborate discussion of shruti and swara comes in 
the twenty eighth chapter of Bharata’s Natyashastra. This chapter is 
known as `Swaradhyaya’, a chapter dedicated to description of musical 
notes. Bharata’s Natyashastra is a `samgraha’ or a collection of theatrical 
and musical knowledge handed over to him from generations to 
generations. However, there are certain concepts which appear in the 
Natyashastra for the first time. The terminology of Shruti, Grama, Raga, 
Jati, Moorchhana etc. is certainly inherited from earlier tradition and one 
can find its links with Naradiya Shiksha. However, it is very clear that the 
meaning of the term shruti in Natyashastra is completely different from 
any other earlier treatises. Bharata provides a robust system of concepts, 
a completely new paradigm of shruti in Natyashastra. The `Shruti 
Nidarshanam’ experiment is a major mile-stone in ancient Indian 
musicology. The reasons for it being so will be discussed later in this 
monograph. The original text of Bharata’s Natyashastra along with 
Sanskrit commentary by Abhinavagupta edited by Ramakrishna Kavi is 
referred here as the basic text. For clarity on certain issues Acharya 
Brihaspati’s Sanskrit and Hindi commentary of Natyashastra is also 
referred where ever required. The English translation and interpretation 
of shlokas is by the author of this monograph himself. 
The first mention of the term shruti occurs in the fourteenth shloka of 
twenty eighth chapter of Natyashastra along with yati and swaras as 
mentioned in the following shloka. 
44 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
ःवरा मामौ मूच्छर्नाश्च तानाः ःथानािन वृत्तयः | शुंकं साधारणे वणार् ह्यलंकाराश्च धातवः || 
[Natyashastra:28-13] 
ौुतयो यतयश्चैव िनत्यं ःवरगतात्मकाः | दारव्यां समवायःतु वीणायां सामदाहृतः ु || 
[Natyashastra:28-14] 
Veena (a string instrument made up of wood) provides facility for 
generating music. One can produce Swaras or musical notes, two Gramas
(two musically significant groups of notes), Murchchhanas, tanas, Sthanas
or three octaves, Vrittis or styles of musical rendering, Shushka, SwaraSadharana, Jati-Sadharana, Varnas, Alamkaras, Dhatu, Yatis, and Shrutis. 
All this is possible with a Veena made of wood [Bharata, p. 8].
This shloka gives an introductory description or briefly mentions the term
shruti along with the other musical concepts, styles of playing music, 
description of musical instrument etc. More detailed treatment of the 
concept of shruti occurs in later shlokas. Natyashastra text has its own 
flow and rhythm. The Natyashastra text is not written sequentially in this 
sense. Broadly speaking, Natyashastra text follows a pattern of deductive 
description where first the major concepts are mentioned in few stanzas 
and then systematically elaborated and discussed as per the context in 
later shlokas. There exists a hidden structure in such an approach. The 
description of the concepts like, swaras, shrutis etc., in the Natyashastra, is 
spread across multiple stanzas. The researcher needs to take stock of all 
the instances of the description and then make sense out of it. The first 
occurrence of the term `shruti’, is in the fourteenth shloka, as mentioned 
here in the context of a generic mention of musical concepts. It is 
mentioned here at the end of shloka number fourteen that the shrutis and 
yatis (pauses), apart from other aspects of music, always reside within the 
bounds of swaras (swaragatatmakah) [Bharata, p. 8]. 
Next reference of shrutis occurs as part of the description of Samvadi 
(consonant) and Vivadi (dissonant) swaras in the twenty second and 
twenty third stanzas. These swara places are defined in terms of shrutis. 
As a part of the same explanation it is mentioned that twenty two shrutis
reside within the bounds of gramas known as Shadja grama and 
Madhyama Grama. Thus, shrutis are mentioned in the context of Gramas. 
This raises questions for some scholars who argue that shrutis are 
mentioned in the context of `Gramas’ and not in the context of swaras
[Rao, S., p. 674]. According to them significance of shrutis is limited to the 
domain of Gramas alone. However, this is an undue concern because first 
45 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
of all, it is not fully correct to say that shrutis are mentioned in the context 
of Gramas alone. Actually shrutis are first mentioned in the shloka number 
fourteen and then the term `shrutyantara’ (distance between two swaras) 
is used splendidly while defining `Samvada-bhavas’ (rules of consonance 
between swaras). This will be discussed later. So, the concern that shrutis
are mentioned only in the context of Gramas and not in the context of 
swaras is highly superfluous. It is also said in Natyashastra, at the end of 
this description that the twenty two shrutis are generated by using the 
(`mandala’ or a cycle of swaras or the) technique known as 
`Swaramandala sadhanam` (swaramandalasadhita) [Bharata, p. 15]. Then 
much elaborated description of shrutis occurs in shlokas twenty fourth to 
twenty sixth where Bharata describes number of shrutis assigned to each 
swara. It is followed by the much celebrated description of shrutis known 
as the experiment called `Shruti-Nidarshanam’. The objective of this 
experiment is to show shrutis in a special way (Nidarshanam). 
In the Natyashastra, shrutis are discussed along with `swaras’ i.e. musical 
notes and therefore it is clear from the discussion that the status of shrutis
is also equivalent to musical notes. Bharata first describes the 
characteristics of swaras and then moves over to the description of shrutis. 
Shrutis are the additional musical notes or places in a `saptaka’ or an 
octave apart from the main seven notes. This has led to the debate that, ‘is 
shruti different from swara or it is the same?’ But this debate is 
unwarranted. It is possible to pick up and select some of these shrutis and 
use them as swaras in a musical rendering. Due to this reason, apart from 
seven main notes, in Natyashastra, there is a description of seven more 
notes which are nothing but shrutis. Kakali Nishada and Kaishiki Nishada
or Antar Gandhara and Sadharana Gandhara are nothing but shrutis. Antar 
Gandhara, Chyuta Panchama, Chyuta Madhyama, Chyuta Shadja are 
nothing else but different shrutis. They can attain the status of swaras. 
Thus it is certain that the status of swaras and shrutis is considered 
different but in essence there is no difference as such. Shrutis are the wellrecognized additional places in an octave other than the swaras but these 
places can also attain the status of swaras. In other words there is a larger 
set of twenty two shrutis according to Bharata and depending on the 
requirement seven or more shrutis are selected out of them and a status of 
swara is assigned to them. 
46 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
5.1 Swara Sthapana (Establishing Musical notes) 
The issue of establishing swaras first and establishing shrutis in a saptaka
is widely debated among scholars. From the description of the 
Natyashastra some of the scholars have argued that swaras are 
established first because description of swaras comes before the 
description of shrutis. But if we closely read the text then it is evident that 
it is not the case. It is true that the description about swaras comes before 
shrutis but one should also note that the process of establishing swaras in 
a saptaka is explained in terms of shrutis. This clearly shows that Bharata 
presupposes the knowledge of shrutis as well as the knowledge of 
`shrutyantara’ or the distance between swaras in terms of number of 
shrutis. It is worth mentioning here that Naradiya Shiksha uses 
`swarantara’ (distance between two swaras in terms of swara-bhava) as 
the unit of measurement while Natyashastra uses `shrutyantara’ (distance 
between two swaras in terms of number of shrutis) as a unit of 
measurement. In the Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva, which will be 
discussed later, it is very clear that shrutis precede swaras. He establishes 
twenty two strings on the Veena and then establishes swaras on them. It is 
also true that the ancient musical practices were still alive till the time of 
Sharangadeva. There existed a continuity of musical tradition from 
Bharata to Sharangadeva. The process of swara-sthapana described in 
Natyashastra clearly indicates that the knowledge of shruti is necessary 
for the establishment of swaras in a saptaka. Only major difference 
between Sharangadeva’s description and Bharata’s description is that 
Sharangadeva has aurally established equi-distanced twenty two different 
strings (each dedicated to each shruti) for establishing swaras in a 
saptaka. Bharata does not mention where to establish swaras. Probably he 
assumes that Veena already has aurally equi-distanced frets and on any of 
the frets the first swara, the Vadi, has to be established. Of course, this 
assumption is also not required. Even today many musical instruments do 
not have frets viz. violin, Sarod and Rudra Veena. Still musicians know 
exact places and locations of swaras on the strings by aural judgement. 
Therefore, it is quite possible that Bharata’s Veena may not have twenty 
two frets for twenty two shrutis. Therefore, `swara-sthapana’ in Bharata’s 
description could be with frets or without frets. 
If we read Bharata’s description of swara-sthapana carefully then it is 
clear that he describes relationship between Vadi and Samvadi in terms of 
number of shrutis. He says distance between Vadi and Samvadi is either 
thirteen shrutis or nine shrutis. Similarly Vivadi swara is also described in 
47 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
terms of two-shruti distance. It means knowledge of shrutis as well as the 
knowledge of shruti-distances is necessary to establish swaras in a 
saptaka. It is possible that the shruti distances can be differentiated by ear 
alone. There is no need of frets on the Bharata’s Veena. For a musically 
trend ear it is very easy to recognize the Shadaj-Pancham Bhava which is 
supposed to be the thirteen-shruti distance. Similarly, the nine-shruti 
distance i.e., Shadja-Madhyama Bhava is very prominent, though not very 
easy to recognize. In the same manner two-shruti distances is also distinct 
and unique that Bharata terms as Vivadi (dissonance) distance. In 
contemporary piano or a harmonium the semitone distance is the distance 
between Ga (E) and Ma (F) notes which is very easily distinguishable due 
to its dissonant qualities. It is approximately close to two-shruti distance. 
So it is quite likely that musically trained ears can easily recognize and 
remember these distances. This possibility is more realistic and practical. 
It is important to note that Bharata himself has nowhere given the 
description of swara-sthapana explicitly. But if we follow the textual 
description closely, we realize that the description of swara-sthapana is 
implicitly present in the text. He mentions that 
वािदसंवािदिववािदषुःथािपतेषुशेषाःत्वनुवािदनः| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
After `establishing’ the Vadi, Samvadi and Vivadi swaras as explained all 
the remaining swaras are called Anuvadi swara [Bharata, p. 15]. The word 
`sthapiteshu’ clearly assumes that all the description in the relevant 
shlokas is aimed at establishing Vadi, Samvadi etc. swaras as described. 
The shloka numbers twenty one, twenty two and twenty three, from the
twenty-eighth chapter of Bharata’s Natyashastra give the description of 
seven swaras and their names and then say that there are four musically
significant qualities called Vaditva, Samvaditva, Vivaditva and Anuvaditva. 
This is clearly mentioned in the next two shlokas. 
षड्जश्च ऋषभश्चैव गान्धरो मध्यमःतथा | पञ्चमो धैवतश्चैव सप्तमोऽथ िनषादवान || ्
[Natyashastra:28-21] 
There are seven swaras as: Shadja, Rishabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, 
Panchama, Dhaivata, and Nishada [Bharata, p. 10]. As per the tradition of 
sutra codification Bharata gives a name-list of swaras in order. Then he 
goes further to describe their potential and musical application. 
48 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
चतुिवधत्वम र् ेतेषां िवज्ञेयं गानयोक्तृिभः | वादी चैवाथ संवािद िववादी चानुवाद्यिप || 
[Natyashastra:28-22] 
These swaras are used by musicians in four different ways as: Vadi (tonic 
or fundamental note), Samvadi (consonant), Vivadi (dissonant), and 
Anuvadi (Assonant) [Bharata, p. 14]. In connection with the previous 
shloka it means that each of the above-mentioned seven swaras can have 
important functions/ roles in musical rendering. These functions are 
useful in composing music. In this sense Vaditva, Samvaditva, Vivaditva 
and Anuvaditva are four important functions of swaras in Indian music. 
Next statement gives a cryptic definition of a Vadi swara. 
तऽ यो यदंशः स तदावादी| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
Swara that defines the octave and musical significance of other swaras is 
called a Vadi swara [Bharata, p. 15]. It’s a tonic or fundamental swara. It is 
the basis of octave and other swaras can be located in reference to the 
Vadi swara. Once the Vadi swara is established the other swaras can be 
established accordingly. 
Along with this description there is textual description defining the abovementioned four qualities of swaras in terms of Shadaj-Pancham Bhava, 
Shadja-Madhyama Bhava and Vivadi Bhava. These Bhavas are understood 
in terms of shruti-distances. Very interestingly immediately after this 
description it is mentioned that `Thus after establishing Vadi, Samvadi and 
Vivadi swaras, all the remaining swaras are considered as Anuvadi swaras’. 
But first one needs to fix the position of a Vadi swara and then the 
position/s of Samvadi swara/s. 
ययोश्च नवकऽयोदशकमन्तरंतावन्योन्यंसंवािदनौ| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
If the shruti-distance between two swaras is of nine shrutis or thirteen 
shrutis then these two swaras are Samvadi swaras of each other [Bharata, 
p. 15]. In reference to the Vadi swara then by using the rules mentioned in 
these shlokas two Samvadi swaras can be generated. Swara-Sthapana is a 
generative process in Natyashastra. Other swaras are also generated from 
the Vadi swara using these rules. Bharata also gives a description of valid 
pairs of Samvadi swaras (consonants). As per the prevalent tradition 
during Bharata’s times, he has given a name-list of such pairs. Today one 
can say that there are more such pairs possible but in Bharata’s paradigm 
these extra pairs were not considered. Bharata gives a list of valid pairs of 
49 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
swaras that qualify the above-mentioned rule of thirteen shrutis and nine 
shrutis. The description is as follows. 
तद्यथा --- षड्जपञ्चमौ, ऋषभधैवतौ, गाधारिनषादवन्तौ ं षड्जमध्यमािवित षड्जमामे| 
मध्यममामेऽप्येवमेव| षड्जपञ्चमवज्यर्ंपञ्चमषभयोश्च र् अऽ संवादः| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
For example- Shadja-Panchama, Rishabha-Dhaivata, Gandhara-Nishada, 
Shadja-Madhyama in Shadja Grama is the valid pairs of swaras that adhere 
to the rule of consonance (samvadabhava). Similarly in Madhyama Grama
except Shadja-Panchama pair all the rest of the above-mentioned pairs is 
valid Samvadi swaras of each other [Bharata, p. 15]. 
अऽ श्लोकः --- 
संवादो मध्यममामेपञ्चमःयषभःय र् च | षड्जमामेतुषड्जःय संवादः पञ्चमःय च ||
[Natyashastra:28-23]. 
Here is a shloka- In Madhyama Grama there exists a consonance between 
Panchama swara and Rishabha swara. In Shadja Grama Shadja-Panchama
are the consonant swaras of each other. This becomes the differentiating 
criterion for Madhyama Grama and Shadja Gram respectively. After 
describing consonant pairs of swaras Bharata defines dissonant swaras as 
follows. This descriptive list of pair of swaras is also a generative list of 
swaras. 
िववािदनःतुतेयेषांिद्वौुितकमन्तरं… [Bharata, p. 15]. 
All swaras which are located at two-shruti distance from each other are 
called Vivadi swaras of each other [Bharata, p. 15]. This describes the rule 
of dissonance and again Bharata gives representative pairs of swaras that 
are dissonant to each other as follows. 
तद्यथा--- ऋषभगाम्धारौ, धैवतिनषादौ| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
For example-Rishabha-Gandhara and Dhaivata-Nishada are the 
representative pairs of Vivadi swaras [Bharata, p. 15]. These are the two 
representative examples but the rule of two-shruti distance applies to all 
the swaras and their respective Vivadi swaras. Bharata is indicating that if 
the distance between two swaras is of two shrutis then all such swaras are 
Vivadis of each other. Later commentators like Abhinavagupta have 
followed it as a rule and applied it to all the swaras to decide their Vivadi 
swaras [Bharata, p. 18]. 
50 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
वािदसंवािदिववािदषुःथािपतेषुशेषाःत्वनुवािदनः| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
After establishing the Vadi, Samvadi and Vivadi swaras all the remaining 
swaras are called Anuvadi swara [Bharata, p. 15]. Bharata has not given 
the name-list of Anuvadi swaras however; the name-list of Anuvadi 
swaras provided by Mr. Ramakrishna Kavi is as follows [Bharata, p. 15]. 
अनुवािदसंज्ञकाः यथा--- Anuvadi swaras are understood as follows: 
षड्जःयषभगा र् ंधारधैवतिनषादाः (Rishabha, Gandhara, Dhaivata and Nishada are 
the Anuvadi swaras of Shadja swara.), ऋषभःयमध्यमपञ्चमिनषादाः
(Madhyama, Panchama and Nishada are the Anuvadi swaras of Rishabha.),
गांधारःयािप मध्यमपञ्चमधैवताः (Madhyama, Panchama, Dhaivata are the 
Anuvadi swaras of Gandhara.), मध्यमःय धैवतपञ्चमिनषादाः(Dhaivata, 
Panchama, Nishada are the Anuvadi swaras of Madhyama.), पञ्चमःय
धैवतःय षड्जमध्यमपञ्चमाः षड्जमामे| Anuvadi swaras of Panchama are Shadja
and Madhyama while Anuvadi swaras of Dhaivata are Shadja, Madhyama
and Panchama. All these are the valid Anuvadi swaras in Shadja Grama. 
मध्यममामेिप (In Madhyama Grama Anuvadi swaras would be as follows.)
मध्यमःय धैवतिनषादषभषड्जगा र् ंधाराः (Anuvadi swaras of Madhyama are 
Dhaivata, Nishada, Rishabha, Shadja, and Gandhara.), पञ्चमःय
धैवतिनषादषभगान्धाराः र् (Anuvadi swaras of Panchama are Nishada, Rishabha, 
and Gandhara.), धैवतःय षड्जषभगान्धाराः र् (Dhaivata has Anuvadis as Shadja, 
Rishabha, and Gandhara.), िनषादःय षड्जषभौ र् ,षड्जःयषभगान्धारौ र् || (Nishada has 
Shadja and Rishabha as Anuvadi while Shadja has Rishabha and Gandhara
as Anuvadis.). 
Here the word `sthapiteshu’ is very important in the above statement. It 
suggests that the description of swaras and their qualities is aimed at 
establishing swaras on the Veena (musical instrument). Issue of 
establishing swaras in an octave has been very critical and debated by 
modern scholars. Since there is no explicit process of establishing swaras
mentioned in the Natyashastra, scholars have been hesitant to fix the 
swara and shruti positions in an octave. Especially, the position of 
Bharata’s Rishabha is very critical to establish the position of `Chyuta 
Panchama’ that defines the `Pramana Shruti’ and Madhyama Grama. 
However, in the absence of clear description of establishing swaras in the 
51 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Natyashastra, scholars have postulated many diverse theories. However, 
the word `sthapiteshu’ in the Bharata’s text provides the clue. Accordingly 
the same description can be used as a guideline for establishing seven 
swaras. The detailed process of establishing seven swaras based on this 
description is outlined in the later part of this section. Meanwhile, Bharata 
summarizes the above discussion as follows. 
तऽ वदनाद्वािद, संवदनात्संवािद, िववदनािद्ववािद, अनवदनादन ु ुवादीित| [Bharata, p. 15]. 
Thus swara that expresses by itself is known as Vadi. Swaras that are 
consonant to each other are called Samvadis. Swaras that are dissonant 
are called Vivadis and swaras that are assonant are called Anuvadis
[Bharata, p. 15]. 
Vadi swara is the most powerful resonating swara and is having the most 
evocative power and plays a seminal role in music-making. The Samvadi 
swaras have secondary importance in music-making as compared to Vadi 
swara. Samvadi swaras can be used in important musical phrases 
depending on their relationship with the Vadi swara. Vivadi swaras also 
have important role as they can evoke softer emotions being very close to 
Vadi. Anuvadis are supposed to be used splendidly in the musical 
rendering depending on their association with the Vadi swara. They are 
supportive swaras and help enriching the impact of musical composition. 
Thus these four categories of swaras are very important in music. The 
Vivadi swaras are used tactfully. Their presence or absence helps 
enhancing aesthetic flavor of the rendering. 
एतेषां च ःवराणां न्यूनत्वमिधकत्वं वा तन्त्र्युपवादनदण्डेिन्ियवैगुण्यादपलभ्यत ु ेःवरिवधान
मेतच्चतुिवधत्विमित र् | [Bharata, p. 15] 
Defects may occur in these relationships between swaras if there are 
defects in the frets, wooden body of the Veena or the faulty playing. Defect 
may also occur if the performer has some deformity [Bharata, p. 15]. 
This whole description is termed as `swaravidhana’ (a comprehensive 
`statement’ about swaras) in Natyashastra. So it appears that this specific 
description implicitly gives clues for establishing swaras in a saptaka 
(octave) since the term `sthapiteshu’ (for establishing) is used there 
[Bharata, p. 15]. If we follow the above description in a step-by-step 
manner it should be possible to establish swaras in a saptaka. There are 
two possibilities. The first possibility is to establish swaras on a Veena
52 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
having twenty two frets for twenty two shrutis. The second possibility is 
establishing swaras on a Veena having no frets. The first case is relatively 
easy but the second case requires musically sensitive ear to establish 
swaras. If we deal with the second case then it will be easier to understand 
the first case. 
Accordingly, if we take a Veena having four strings, and adjust and tune 
the second string in such a way that it will produce the best possible 
sound which is not unwarrantedly low or high in pitch. For this
experiment all the seven swaras can be established on the second string as 
described below. Then tune all the other remaining strings like a 
Tanapura, appropriately assuming that the second string stands for the 
middle Shadja of an octave. It’s a common experience that a Veena or a 
Tanapura can be tuned to its natural frequency of that particular 
instrument. Each instrument has its own natural frequency depending on 
its material and its quality, length and dimensions of the instrument, 
quality and length of the strings used etc. By the above method one can 
tune the instrument to its own natural frequency. Once that is done, this 
natural frequency can be considered as a Vadi swara. This is also called 
Amsha swara because it is a tonic and acts as a basis for establishing other 
swaras as well as other octaves. Optionally one can choose any position on 
the string and consider that as a Vadi or Amsha swara as per Bharata’s 
description. In this case Vadi and Amsha are the same (although the term 
`Amsha’ is used in a wider sense by Bharata in the later part of 
Natyashastra). 
The next statement gives the rule that swaras having nine-shruti distance 
and thirteen-shruti distance are Samvadis of each other. So once the Vadi
is fixed on the Veena, one can always set two swaras on the Veena having 
nine-shruti distance and thirteen-shruti distance. These are the two 
Samvadis of the Vadi swara. The issue will arise that how to decide the 
nine-shruti distance and thirteen-shruti distance. It is done by using the 
aural sensitivity of ears. These two distances are so natural that if a 
person starts exploring on the instrument very quickly these distances 
will be noticed. For a trained musician it is an easy task. In the above 
description Bharata must have professional musician in mind and not a 
novice. So from a Vadi swara we get two Samvadi swaras. If the same rule 
is applied to these two Samvadi swaras then two more Samvadis of these 
Samvadis will be generated. This also suggests the cyclical relationship 
between Vadi and Samvadi. This triggers a generative process since one 
can establish two Samvadis of these two Samvadis. This in turn becomes a 
53 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
cyclical method of establishing an entire octave. Abhinavagupta in his 
commentary on the above-mentioned description [Bharata, p. 15] says 
that internal distances or relationships among the positions of swaras
form a `Chakra’ a wheel or a cycle that makes an octave- a swara mandala. 
Earlier sages like Aangirasa and Kashyapa had demonstrated such a 
`Parimandala’ or cyclical structure of swaras [Abhinavagupta in Bharata, 
p. 19]. 
तत एव ःथानान्तरे ःवरमंडलत्विमित चबमुच्यते| तच्च पिरमंडलं आंिगरसकाँयपािदिभः
मुिनिभः दिशतमर् ्| [Abhinavagupta in Bharata, p. 19]. 
Such a Parimandala (cyclical structure) is achieved only through 
appropriate relationships between swaras such as Shadja-Madhyama 
Bhava and Shadja-Panchama Bhava as discussed in next few paragraphs. 
This method may be termed as a `Chakriya Method’ of establishing a 
saptaka. Although not mentioned in Natyashastra, by applying Chakriya
method by using both the samvada bhavas: Shadaj-Pancham Bhava and 
Shadja-Madhyama Bhava, all the twenty two shrutis can be generated. 
Along with this, Abhinavagupta also says that there had been a common 
practice of establishing Shadja etc. swaras on Veena by using finger-widths 
as a unit of measurement and stretching the strings accordingly
[Abhinavagupta in Bharata, p. 17]. 
वीणायांच षड्जािदःथानेअङ्गुल्यन्तर पीडनपूवर्कम ्अिभहन्यमानेतत्संपाद्यिमित व्यवहारः| 
[Abhinavagupta in Bharata, p. 17]. 
In the tradition this is called a method of `angula pramana’ (measurement 
by width of fingers). Therefore, they might have a set measurement for 
establishing seven swaras in a saptaka. 
There exists one more possibility. Once the Panchama and Madhyama are 
established then it was known that the aural distance between Panchama
and Madhyama is of four shrutis as mentioned by Bharata. On this basis 
one can establish Bharata’s Gandhara because the aural distance between 
Madhyama and Bharata’s Gandhara is also of four shrutis. Once Bharata’s 
Gandhara is established as discussed earlier the two-shruti distance is 
distinct and easy to recognize which is a `Vivadi’ distance. So using this 
distance one can derive Bharata’s Rishabha from Bharata’s Gandhara
because as mentioned by Bharata the distance between Bharata’s 
Rishabha and Bharata’s Gandhara is of two shrutis. Then by applying 
Shadja-Panchama Bhava one can derive Bharata’s Nishada from Bharata’s 
54 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Gandhara and Bharata’s Dhaivata from Bharata’s Rishabha. Thus all the 
basic seven swaras of a saptaka can be established by using the above 
method. With a little variation in the above description it is possible to 
generate all the Bharata’s seven swaras in a step-by-step manner as 
follows. 
1. First establish a Vadi swara on a chosen position on a string of the 
Veena. 
2. By using Shadja-Panchama Bhava i.e. thirteen-shruti distance 
establishes a Panchama swara on the string. 
3. By using Shadja-Madhyama Bhava i.e. nine-shruti distance 
establishes a Madhyama swara on the string. 
4. By applying Shadja-Panchama Bhava to this newly generated 
Madhyama you also get the higher Shadja. The higher Shadja can 
be generated by various methods. It can be generated from the 
original Shadja by applying Shadja-Shadja Bhava also. 
5. By applying Shadja-Madhyama Bhava or nine-shruti distance to 
the newly generated Madhyama one gets Bharata’s Nishada. 
6. From Bharata’s Nishada it is possible to infer back to the 
Bharata’s Gandhara by applying Shadja-Panchama Bhava or the 
thirteen-shruti distance. 
7. Now with the help of Vivadi Bhava i.e. two-shruti distance to 
Bharata’s Gandhara in a backward direction one can get the 
Bharata’s Rishabha. Similarly, Bharata’s Dhaivata can be 
generated by applying Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s Nishada in the 
same manner. 
Thus in seven steps one can generate seven basic swaras by applying two 
Samvada Bhavas (rules of consonance) and the Vivadi Bhava (rules of 
dissonance). Bharata also says that by applying Vivadi Bhava to all seven 
swaras we get pairs of Vivadi swaras. It can be done in a following manner. 
1. Apply Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s Gandhara to get Antara 
Gandhara. 
2. Apply Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s Nishada to get Kakali Nishada. 
3. Apply Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s Madhyama to get Teevra 
Madhyama or Prati Madhyama although Bharata has not 
mentioned about its use in the jatis or ragas. But this shruti is 
certainly generated and was a part of Bharata’s scheme of an 
octave. 
55 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
4. Apply Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s Panchama to get Komal Dhaivata
which is also not mentioned by Bharata anywhere in the text. 
5. Apply Vivadi Bhava to Shadja to get Komal Rishabha or Dvi-shruti 
Rishabha which is also not mentioned in the text. 
Thus by applying Vivadi Bhava to Bharata’s seven swaras we get five more 
swaras of which Antara Gandhara and Kakali Nishada are mentioned by 
Bharata and discussed their use in `Jati’ music. By this approach we get 
total twelve swaras. Bharata considers all the remaining swaras as 
Anuvadis. Here again it is indicated that there exists a given set of twenty 
two shrutis using Chakriya method and by using Shadja-Panchama Bhava
and Shadja-Madhyama Bhava we select seven shrutis and call them 
swaras. Then by applying Vivadi Bhava to these seven swaras we select 
five more swaras making the total number twelve. All the other shrutis are 
called Anuvadi swaras. It means that out of the given set of twenty two 
shrutis, remaining ten shrutis are considered as Anuvadi swaras. However, 
even in the absence of Chakriya method, it is possible to establish Anuvadi 
swaras using Shadja-Panchama Bhava and Shadja-Madhyama Bhava that 
Bharata has not indicated. 
This description clearly indicates that it is possible to establish Bharata’s 
saptaka of basic seven swaras by following the textual description in a 
step-by-step manner. As mentioned by Bharata in the text, with the help of 
Shadja-Panchama Bhava (thirteen-shruti distance), Shadja-Madhyama 
Bhava (nine-shruti distance) and Vivadi Bhava (two-shruti distance) it is 
possible to establish a Saptaka of seven swaras. In the process five more 
Vivadi swaras are also selected. Remaining ten swaras are considered as 
Anuvadi swaras. Bharata calls this process as `Swara-Mandala-Sadhanam’. 
This also explains why Vadi, Samvadi, Vivadi and Anuvadi swaras are 
mentioned in that particular order in the shloka. They are stated in the 
same sequence because they are supposed to be used in that order to 
generate a `swara mandala’ or a saptaka. It is worth mentioning that the 
whole process of establishing Saptaka is carried out using aural sensitivity 
of the musicians. Now it becomes quite crucial that such a process may not 
precisely match with mathematical formulations. If the same process is 
executed by mathematical formulation then the swara positions which are 
generated would be different. Contemporary musicologists understand 
`Samvada Bhavas’ in terms of mathematical ratios: Shadja-Panchama 
Bhava as a ratio of 3/2, Shadja-Madhyama Bhava's ratio of 4/3 and Vivadi 
Bhava as the ratio of 16/15 (semi tone) that give precise frequency values 
of the swaras. On the other hand if swaras are generated with aural 
56 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
sensitivity, they will not match these values exactly. It may be considered 
as mathematical approximation but from musical point of view since these 
swaras sound acceptable and musically pleasant to musicians it is 
certainly an aural perfection. During Bharata’s times the mathematical 
ratios were not used for ascertaining the swara positions in a saptaka. On 
the other hand, as Sharangadeva also mentions in his Sangita Ratnakar
that swara positions were established by aural sensitivity. The 
Natyashastra text is highly compact, compressed with cryptic meaning 
and very rich in content. Every word is used very carefully and carries 
definitive meaning. While understanding such sutras and each and every 
word of the text one needs to take utmost care while understanding and 
interpreting them. 
5.2 Grama Sthapana (Establishing Scales) 
The most important reference to shrutis comes in the context of 
establishing Gramas because there it is mentioned that twenty two shrutis
reside in the bounds of two Gramas. 
अथद्वौ मामौ षड्जमामो मध्यममामश्चेित| अऽािौता द्वािवंशितौतयः ु ःवरमण्डलसािधताः| 
तद्यथा--- [Bharata, p. 15] 
Thus there are two Gramas: Shadja Grama and Madhyama Grama. Here 
reside twenty two shrutis that are generated by using the technique of 
`swara mandala sadhanam’ (generating/ establishing a saptaka) [Bharata, 
p. 15]. 
As already discussed seven swaras can be established by following the 
cyclical method so also twenty two shrutis can also be generated by 
extending the same method. `Swara mandala Sadhanam’ is the same 
cyclical method of establishing shrutis. The Sanskrit word `mandala’
means a circle or a cycle, `swara’ means a musical note and `sadhanam’
means to achieve or establish in this context. The next shloka gives the 
distribution of twenty two shrutis among seven swaras as follows. 
ितॐो द्वे च चतॐश्च चतॐिःतॐ एव च| द्वे चैवाद्य चतॐश्च षड्जमामे भवेिद्विधः || 
[Natyashastra:28-24] 
The shruti distances between respective swaras in the Shadja Grama
starting with Shadja are as follows: 3-2-4-4-3-2 and previous 4 shrutis (of 
57 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Shadja) [Bharata, p. 19]. As it is observed by many scholars, twenty two 
shrutis are not distributed evenly among seven swaras. First of all 
mathematically it is not possible to divide twenty two shrutis among seven 
swaras. But apart from that the process of evolution of seven swaras and 
twenty two shrutis were mainly responsible for this kind of division. 
Bharata’s seven swaras are originated from Vedic accents as discussed 
earlier and later on the number swaras has increased. The concept of 
shrutis in Naradiya Shiksha was quite different. Shrutis were considered as 
special sonar qualities of swaras. Shrutis as pitch positions is a gift of 
Bharata’s Natyashastra. Bharata inherited swara positions from Vedas and 
Naradiya Shiksha. The Chakriya method of establishing swaras was in use 
and Bharata clearly extended it for establishing twenty two shrutis. 
Probably this was the magic formula to accommodate seven and more 
swara positions of Vedas and few more positions such as Antara Gandhara
and Kakali Nishada. There are indications that more swara positions were 
known to Naradiya Shiksha than the Vedic swara positions. Even the 
Chatuh Shruti Rishabha and Chatuh Shruti Dhaivata were known to them. 
It seems that Chatushruti Rishabha and Chatushruti Dhaivata which are 
considered quite prominent swaras in contemporary musical scales were 
not part of Bharata's scheme of thinking. They were just treated as 
Anuvadi swaras. But in Naradiya Shiksha the Chatushruti Dhaivata is called 
`Swaara’ swara. Bharata’s Dhaivata swara was termed as `Atiswaara’ i.e. 
beyond `Swaara’ swara (beyond Bharata’s Dhaivata on flute and below 
Bharata’s Dhaivata on Veena). As per Naradiya Shiksha Gandhara and 
Nishada are considered as Udatta swaras while Rishabha and Dhaivata are 
called Anudatta swaras. Naradiya Shiksha says that the shruti that is in 
between the Udatta and Anudatta is called `Sadharana’ shruti and the 
same shruti is also called `Swaara’ swara. The shloka is as follows. 
उच्चनीचःय यन्मध्ये साधारणिमित ौुितः| तं ःवारं ःवारसंज्ञायां ूितजानिन्त शैिक्षकाः|| 
[Naradiya Shiksha 1-8-7] 
The shruti between high and low swaras is known as `Sadharana’. It is 
known to be `Swaara’ in the terminology of swaras (Vedic swara) by those 
who are familiar with recitation [Bhise, U., p. 105]. Bhatta Shobhakara in 
his commentary, mentions that such a `Swaara’ swara is considered as 
`Viswara’ or wrong swara. One is supposed to be careful in not using it. 
In this sense if Bharata’s Gandhara is called Udatta and Bharata’s Rishabha
is called Anudatta then the in between shruti that resides exactly in the 
58 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
middle is Chatuh-shruti Rishabha. The shruti distance between Bharata’s 
Gandhara and Bharata’s Rishabha is of two shrutis. The Chatuh shruti 
Rishabha falls exactly in the middle being Chatuh shruti Rishabha. Same is 
true with Chatushruti Dhaivata. So it appears that Chatushruti Rishabha
(contemporary pure Rishabha) and Chatuh shruti Dhaivata (contemporary 
pure Dhaivata) were well- recognized (of course as wrong swaras) by 
Naradiya Shiksha and though accommodated in the Bharata’s scheme of 
twenty two shrutis they have not been granted the status that they enjoy 
today. 
Bharata’s scheme of swaras and associated shrutis is explained in 
following shlokas. 
चतुःौितभ ु र्वेत् षड्ज ऋषभिस्तर्ौितः ु ःमतः ृ | िद्वौितश्चु ैव गान्धारो मध्यमश्च चतुःौितः ु ||
[Natyashastra:28-25] 
Shadja is of four shrutis (Shadja is established on the fourth shruti), after 
that Rishabha is of three shrutis (Rishabha is to be established on seventh 
shruti), Gandhara is of two shrutis (Gandhara on ninth shruti) and the 
Madhyama is of four shrutis (and finally Madhyama on thirteenth shruti). 
पञ्चमःतद्वदेव ःयात्िऽौितध ु वतो ैर् मतः| िद्वौितश्चु िनषादः ःयात्षड्जमामे िविधभर्वेत || ्
[Natyashastra:28-26] 
Similarly Panchama is also of four shrutis (that is on the seventh shruti) 
and Dhaivata is of three shrutis (on twentieth shruti). Nishada has two 
shrutis (Nishada is on the last shruti). This is the procedure of distributing 
seven swaras in a Shadja Grama. This arrangement of shrutis and swaras is 
specifically useful for performing the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment 
which will be discussed later on. In the above description Shadja is of four 
shrutis so it is established on the fourth shruti of a Veena but it is not 
always necessary. Shadja can be established on any shruti and the 
distances of other swaras can be followed. The above description is given 
as a reference point for the fourth coming `Shruti-Nidarshanam’
experiment. Therefore it has its purpose and beauty which will be 
explained later on. These swara positions are the valid positions for 
Shadja Grama. The Madhyama Grama is generated out of Shadja Grama by 
making just one change. Grama is a group of swaras and in today’s 
terminology it may be defined as a scale. The above-mentioned swara
positions define the Shadja Grama scale. By changing the positions of 
Panchama swara the same scale is converted into Madhyama Grama scale. 
59 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
मध्यममामेतुपञ्चमः ौुत्यपकृष्टः कायर्ः| [Bharata, p. 20] 
In Madhyama Grama Panchama needs to be lowered by one shruti 
[Bharata p. 20] that means Panchama will have three shrutis and Dhaivata
will have four. Rest of the swaras will have shrutis as intact. With this 
statement it is clear that the earlier discussion was about the Shadja 
Grama. To transform it into a Madhyama Grama the position of the 
Panchama swara needs to change. As per the earlier description of 
swarasthapana, Panchama swara was established on the fourth shruti 
(seventeenth shruti) after Madhyama. For Madhyama Grama the position 
of Panchama has to be shifted one shruti lower. So it should be established 
on the third shruti (sixteenth shruti) after Madhyama. Positions of the rest 
of the swaras remain the same. To achieve this one should know how to 
shift Panchama swara one shruti lower. So far Bharata has described 
thirteen-shruti distance, nine-shruti distance, two-shruti distance but he 
has not mentioned the one-shruti distance. He calls one-shruti distance as 
a `Pramana Shruti’. That is explained as follows. 
5.3 Pramana Shruti (Establishing Standard Shruti) 
The concept of `Pramana Shruti’ has attracted a big debate among 
scholars. The word `Pramana’ literally means a `standard’, or a standard 
`unit’ of measurement. In reference with Bharata’s text, Pramana shruti
means a standard unit of aural difference between any two shrutis. The 
following quotation from Natyashastra lays down the procedure to 
demonstrate `Pramana Shruti’ or the standard unit shruti in a certain and 
definite way is as follows. 
एवं ःवौत्यु ुत्कषादपकषा र् द्वा र् यदन्तरं मादर्वादायतत्वाद्वा तत्ूमाणं ौुितः
िनदशर्नंत्वासामिभव्याख्याःयामः| [Bharata, p. 20] 
The Pramana shruti is understood as described above. On a naturally 
tuned Veena, a position of a particular shruti is called its own position or 
`swa-sthana’. Tightening of a string of a Veena is called Utkarsha and 
loosening of a string is called Apakarsha. By tightening the string we get 
the higher position of the shruti which is termed as Aayata position. When 
a string is loosened the shruti position is shifted towards a lower 
frequency. This is called the Mrudu position of a shruti. This shifting on 
60 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
higher and lower sides should be very minimal but musically 
distinguishable from the original position of a shruti. So we get two 
positions one on higher side and the other on the lower side. They are 
termed as Aayata and Mardava or Mrudu positions respectively. The 
distance between the Aayata and the Mrudu shruti is considered as a 
`Pramana’ shruti or a `Unit’ shruti distance [Bharata, pp. 20-21]. 
Abhinavagupta clearly mentions, while elaborating the process of 
understanding `Pramana’ shruti that the shruti divisions are Niyata’ 
(uniform), based on the rule of Pramana shruti. He further says that those 
who believe in `Aniyata’ (unequal) shruti divisions have a false 
perspective. [Abhinavagupta in Bharata, p. 22]. Even Naradiya Shiksha, as 
discussed earlier, uses the concepts of `Aayata’ and `Mrudu’ as two jatis or 
types of shrutis. These two pitch positions are very important for Naradiya 
Shiksha as types of shrutis but according to Abhinavagupta these are used 
as the extreme boundary positions of a shruti itself. This shows how 
ancient concepts of Aayatatva and Mardavatva from Naradiya Shiksha 
were followed in Natyashastra of Bharata and understood by later 
musicologists and how seamlessly they were integrated in the theory. This 
clarifies that if the original position of a swara is considered as the Madhya 
shruti according to Naradiya Shiksha then Mrudu shruti is half a Pramana 
Shruti lower than the swara and the Aayata shruti is half a Pramana Shruti
higher than the swara. 
Pramana shruti is a standard unit-shruti distance. Bharata describes all the 
Samvada Bhavas and Vivada Bhavas in terms of unit-shruti distance. For 
him Shadja-Panchama Bhava is of thirteen-shruti distance while ShadjaMadhyama Bhava is of nine-shruti distance. The Vivada Bhava is of twoshruti distance according to Bharata. Here distance means aural distance 
between two shrutis. Logically it follows from this description that 
thirteen-shruti distance should be made up of thirteen Pramana shrutis, 
nine-shruti distance is made up of nine Pramana shrutis and two-shruti
distance is made up of two Pramana shrutis. The logical conclusion is that 
Bharata’s shrutis were equi-distanced or equal temperament. It means 
that Bharata’s scale was an equal temperament scale of twenty two shrutis
or shruti positions. Even as discussed elsewhere; Sharangadeva’s 
description of shrutis in Sangita Ratnakar is consistent with this 
description. Therefore, it is certain that till the time of Sharangadeva 
twenty two shrutis were considered equal temperament and thus the 
phrase `Pramana shruti’ is valid and also makes sense while 
understanding shrutis. 
61 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
However, in the course of shruti analysis and shruti discussion in last two 
centuries there has been a tendency among the scholars to assume shrutis
of unequal distance. The debate arises out of postulating three different 
standards for shrutis. Some scholars have argued that thirteen-shruti
distance, nine-shruti distance and two-shruti distance are the three 
different standards of shrutis. In this sense there are three `Pramana 
Shrutis’ according to them. This leads to unequal division of shrutis. But 
still there is no agreement on the exact ratios of these three standard 
distances. This led to multiple theories of shrutis. Thus there have been 
multiple interpretations of the phrase `Pramana Shruti’ but eventually 
they have realized that the argument for multiple standards for shrutis is 
not tenable. After analyzing all the arguments, it appears that all scholars 
tend to consider Pramana Shruti as a `smallest’ shruti. They do not 
consider Pramana shruti as `unit’ shruti. Somehow, there is a grand 
agreement among the scholars, by applying various mathematical 
formulations and with certain assumptions that the value of Pramana 
Shruti is denoted by the smallest ratio of 81/80. The ratio of 81/80 gives 
the value of 1.0125 as the value of so-called smallest Pramana Shruti.
Bharata’s equal temperament twenty two shrutis will give the value of 
Pramana shruti as 1.032. Thus from Bharata’s description the value of 
Pramana Shruti is 1.032 while the modern scholars do not agree with this 
value. So the scholars tend to assume that shrutis are unequal. Many 
scholars have recommended many formulations for unequal shrutis. As a 
result, the scholastic community conducting research on twenty two 
shrutis has become stagnated with multiple theories of shrutis. On the one 
hand their results are not consistent with Bharata’s views and on the 
other hand Bharata’s theory of equal temperament shrutis is not 
acceptable to them because it does not match with the `just intonation 
scale’ and Pythagorean scale. As a result there is no consensus among 
scholars about shruti positions as well as the concept of shruti itself. There 
is a feeling among the new generation musicians that the whole shrutiresearch is a futile effort since all these theories are inconclusive. 
Another interesting fact is that Bharata mentions of twenty two shrutis, 
but in the entire text it is no-where mentioned that all twenty two shrutis
are used in Jatis and Ragas. On the other hand there is a mention of only 
fourteen shrutis which are used as swaras in Jatis. So it seems that out of 
twenty two shrutis only fourteen shrutis could attain the status of swaras
in actual practice. This leads to a question that if only fourteen shrutis are 
used in actual music then what is the need of remaining eight shrutis. So 
the discussion of twenty two shrutis is futile. However, if one reads 
62 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Bharata’s description carefully it is not correct to say that shruti-research 
is a futile effort. All the twenty two shrutis are potential swaras and their 
usage depends on the performers in various musical applications. For 
example today Chatu-shruti Rishabha and Prati-Madhyama are considered 
as legitimate swaras but they had no role in Bharata’s system of music. 
Bharata has not mentioned their applications but recognized their pitch 
positions as shrutis. They remained as potential swaras till modern times. 
Also, one must understand that Bharata’s paradigm of twenty two shrutis
is a broader theoretical frame-work that provides possibilities of musical 
explorations and most importantly it accommodates Vedic swaras
seamlessly. Bharata has developed an amazing device called `ShrutiNidarshanam’ to demonstrate shrutis in a definite and certain way. It is 
discussed as follows. 
5.4 Shruti-Nidarshanam (Demonstrating Microtones) 
The Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment is a unique gift of Bharata to the 
world of music to demonstrate existence of twenty two shrutis. This 
experiment is described in twenty eighth chapter of Bharata’s 
Natyashastra. It is not mentioned in any of the earlier treatises on Indian
music therefore it is certain that this experiment was invented during 
Bharata’s times. The original creator of this experiment is not known but 
since it is mentioned in Bharata’s Natyashastra it is assumed that Bharata 
himself must have designed it. This experiment is a conclusive proof of 
equal temperament twenty two shrutis. As per this experiment Shrutis
can be demonstrated in a definitive way through an experiment on two 
Veenas. The procedure for this experiment is called `Sarana Chatushtaya’
method. This experiment is described as follows in a step-by-step manner. 
The first Sarana: 
यथा--- द्वे वीणे तुल्यूमाणतन्त्र्युपवादनदण्डमूछर्नेकृत्वा षड्जमामािौते काय|ेर् 
[Bharata, p. 20] 
Take two Veenas of same size with equal number of strings (and frets), 
with same dimensions in terms of length and other parameters. Tune both 
the Veenas in a Shadja Grama. Establish seven swaras properly on both the 
Veenas. One of them is called `Dhruva Veena’ or `Achala’ Veena while the 
other is called `Chala’ Veena. Both the Veenas need to be tuned by using 
the method of `swara sthapana’ discussed earlier. By this all the seven 
63 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
swaras will be at their original natural positions. The experiment allows 
mapping swaras of `Chala Veena’ onto the swaras of `Achala Veena’. At 
every step mapping happens in such a manner that groups of two shrutis, 
three shrutis and four shrutis are demonstrated in a decisive manner along 
with their individual positions. 
Process of establishing swaras on both the Veenas is already explained 
during the discussion on `swara-sthapana’. As per the description Shadja
is set on the fourth shruti and then rest of the swaras are placed as per 
relative distances as mentioned in the description of `swara-sthapana’. 
The process of establishment of swara must have been a simple process. It 
is possible that the Veenas that were commonly used by musicians those 
days would have frets for these twenty two shrutis. Out of these musicians 
can choose the required seven swaras. Even today twelve positions of 
swaras are predetermined on the Veena. But it is certain that the 
instrument-makers as well as musicians should have the theoretical 
knowledge of setting up the frets on the Veena. If there are predetermined 
seven or twenty two frets on both the Veenas then this experiment is 
easier to perform. If there are no predetermined frets then a skilled 
musicians only can perform this experiment. Since it’s a theoretical 
experiment and therefore it is expected that the person should have 
adequate musical knowledge. Only condition is that both the Veenas
should be identical in all the respects. If there are no pre-existing frets on 
both the Veenas then after `swara-sthapana’ one can put marks on both 
the Veenas to identify swara positions. 
तयोरन्यतरःयां पञ्चमःयापकषेर् ौुितं मध्यममािमकीं कृत्वा तामेव च पञ्चमःय
ौुत्युत्कषवशात र् ्षड्जमािमकींकुयार्त|्[Bharata, p. 20] 
Now lower down the Panchama swara of Chala Veena by one shruti
(Pramana shruti) as discussed earlier during the description of a 
`Pramana Shruti’. So the Chala Veena becomes a Madhyama Grama Veena. 
This is achieved by lowering down the Panchama of Chala Veena such that 
it will tune with the Bharata’s Rishabha on the Achala Veena with a 
Samvada Bhava of nine-shruti distance i.e. Shadja-Madhyama Bhava. This 
is done because there exists a Shadja-Madhyama Bhava between Bharata’s 
Rishabha and Panchama of Madhyama Grama. By this a `Pramana shruti’ is 
demonstrated. Then tune all the rest of the swaras of a Chala Veena in such 
a way that keeps the Panchama’s new position intact, the Chala Veena
becomes the Shadja Grama Veena again [Bharata, p. 20]. 
64 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
एकौितरपक ु ृष्टा भवित| [Bharata, p. 20] 
Now the Chala Veena is one shruti lower than the Dhruva Veena. All the 
swaras of Chala Veena are one shruti lower than all the swaras of Dhruva 
Veena [Bharata, p. 20]. 
Swara positions of the Chala Veena keep shifting at every step in the 
whole experiment towards lower side while Achala Veena swara positions 
are kept in the original positions. The beauty of the experiment is that at 
every step one can compare the relative positions of each swara of the 
Chala Veena with their counter parts on the Achala Veen. For instance, at 
this first stage, every swara of the Chala Veena is one shruti (Pramana 
Shruti) lower than all the swaras of the Achala Veena. One can cross check 
and understand what the aural distance of the Pramana Shruti is. In other 
words one knows the Pramana Shruti distance in a definite way. 
Along with this process one very important phenomenon is happening 
and that is as every swara of Chala Veena is lowered by one shruti, each 
swara is mapped on the one-shruti lower position on the Achala Veena. As 
a result apart from original swara/ shruti positions, seven new positions 
are generated or mapped on the Achala Veena. These new positions are 
nothing but seven more shruti positions. These can be marked and 
recorded on the Achala Veena. So at the end of first step itself seven 
original swara/ shruti positions plus seven new shruti positions are 
generated. As a whole fourteen shrutis are demonstrated at the end of the 
first step. The newly generated shrutis thus would be as follows: Dvi-shruti 
Rishabha, Chatuh-shruti Rishabha, Chyuta-Madhyama, Chyuta-Panchama, 
Dvi-shruti Dhaivata, Chatuh-shruti Dhaivata, and Chyuta-Shadja. These are 
the seven new shrutis generated at the end of the first step or first Sarana. 
Interestingly newly generated shrutis do not overlap on any of the existing 
seven swaras/ shrutis. These are absolutely new shrutis. 
The Second Sarana: 
पुनरिप तद्वदेवापकषेर्त, ् यथागान्धारिनषादवन्तािवतरःयामृषभधैवतौ ूवेआयतः
िद्वौत्यिधकत्वात ु ्… [Bharata, p. 20] 
Again in the same manner lower down the Chala Veena by one shruti so 
that Gandhara and Nishada of Chala Veena will be tuned into Rishabha and 
Dhaivata of the Dhruva Veena respectively because now the Chala Veena is 
two shrutis lower than the Dhruva Veena [Bharata, p. 20]. 
65 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
This is the conclusive process of lowering the Chala Veena by two shrutis. 
During the earlier step the Chala Veena was lowered down by one shruti. 
The process was tricky because one needs excellent aural skill to 
recognize `Pramana Shruti’ distance. However this second step is easy 
because one needs to lower down the Nishada swara of Chala Veena till it 
is tuned in with the Dhaivata of the Achala Veena. Automatically the 
Gandhara of Chala Veena will merge into Rishabha of Achala Veena. If this 
does not happen then it means that the original establishment of seven 
swaras is not correct or the earlier aural positioning of `Pramana Shruti’ is 
not correct. Here the performer can cross-check both the possibilities and 
make corrections if required. If corrections are not required then it shows 
that the swaras are tuned and established properly. As a result all the 
swaras of Chala Veena are now two shruti lowered than all the swaras of 
Achala Veena. One can enhance the aural skill of recognizing two-shruti
distance by comparing all seven swaras of Chala Veena with their counter 
parts on the Achala Veena. At the end of this second step of the experiment 
the knowledge of `two-shruti’ distance is enriched. 
As a result of the mapping process five more shrutis are generated at the 
end of the second Sarana/ step. These are as follows: Eka-shruti Rishabha, 
Antara-Gandhara, Prati-Madhyama or Teevra-Madhyama, Eka-shruti 
Dhaivata and Kakali Nishada. So in all seven plus five i.e. twelve shrutis are 
demonstrated at the end of second stage of the experiment. Although all 
the seven swaras of Chala Veena are lowered by one shruti, only five new 
shrutis are generated because two swaras of Chala Veena, Nishada and 
Gandhara have been mapped on the pre-existing Dhaivata and Rishabha of 
the Achala Veena. The new shrutis are generated on the Achala Veena and 
since Dhaivata and Rishabha were already there they are not counted as 
new shrutis. So at the end of this step five new shrutis are generated. 
The Third Sarana: 
पुनरिप तद्वदेवापकृष्टायां धैवताषभािवतरःया र् ं पञ्चमषड्जौ ूवेआयतः िऽौत्यिधकत्वात ु |्
[Bharata, p. 20]
Again in the same manner lower down the Chala Veena by one shruti so 
that Dhaivata and Rishabha of Chala Veena will be tuned (enter) into 
Panchama and Shadja of the Dhruva Veena respectively because now the 
Chala Veena is three shrutis lower than its original position [Bharata, p. 
20]. 
66 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
As a result of the mapping process three more shrutis are generated at the 
end of the third step. These are as follows: Sadharana-Gandhara, ChyutaPrati-Madhyama, and Kaishiki Nishada. Although, all seven swaras of Chala 
Veena are lowered by one shruti, only three new shrutis are generated as 
mentioned above because Dhaivata and Rishabha are mapped on preexisting Panchama and Shadja swaras of the Achala Veena. Also two more 
swaras of Chala Veena: Gandhara and Nishada are mapped on Dvi-shruti 
Rishabha and Dvi-shruti Dhaivata of Achala Veena that were newly 
generated during the first step of the experiment. Therefore they are not 
treated as new shrutis. As a result only three shrutis are newly generated 
at this step. 
So in all seven plus five plus three i.e. fifteen shrutis are demonstrated at 
the end of the third stage of the experiment. If the original seven swara
positions are added to this then the number becomes twenty two. So 
actually at the end of the third step twenty two shrutis are demonstrated 
in this experiment. Then what is the need of the fourth step in the 
experiment? The fourth step is a concluding step to show that beyond 
these twenty two shrutis no new extra shruti is generated. 
The Fourth Sarana: 
तद्वत्पुनरपकृष्टायां पञ्चममध्यमषड्जा इतरःयां मध्यमगान्धारिनषादवन्तः ूवेआयिन्त
चतुःौत्यभ्यिधकत्वात ु |् [Bharata, p. 20] 
Again in the same manner lower down the Chala Veena by one shruti so 
that Panchama, Madhyama and Shadja of Chala Veena will be tuned 
(enter) into Madhyama, Gandhara and Nishada of the Dhruva Veena
respectively because now the Chala Veena is four shrutis lower than the 
Achala Veena [Bharata, p. 20]. 
Interestingly no new shruti is generated at this step. All the lowered 
swaras of the Chala Veena map exactly on pre-existing or pre-generated 
swara/ shruti positions of the Achala Veena. For instance, four remaining 
swaras of Chala Veena: Rishabha, Gandhara, Dhaivata and Nishada are 
mapped on Chyuta Shadja, Eka-shruti Rishabha, Chyuta Panchama and 
Eka-shruti Dhaivata of Achala Veena respectively. So there is no 
generation of new shruti positions and therefore this is the concluding 
step of the experiment. 
67 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
The beauty of the experiment is that at every step Chala Veena is lowered 
by one-shruti distance. Thus in first steps one-shruti distance, second step 
two-shruti distance, third step three-shruti distance and in the fourth step 
the four-shruti distance is demonstrated. Original seven swaras are the 
seven shruti positions established by `swara-mandala-sadhanam’ process. 
At the end of first step maximum number of shrutis i.e. seven new shrutis
are generated. At the end of second step slightly less i.e. five new shrutis
are generated and in the third step only three new shrutis are generated. 
Thus in all twenty two shrutis are demonstrated out of which seven shrutis
were already there and fifteen shrutis are newly generated during the 
experiment. The last step does not generate a shruti. So it makes a 
statement that no more new shrutis are possible. If the process continues 
then the same shrutis will keep on mapping one above other but no new 
shruti will be generated. At the same time an interesting phenomenon is 
happening. As it is mentioned, during the process of swara-sthapana, 
Shadja of both the Veenas was established on the fourth shruti. So the 
octaves of both the Veenas were four shrutis higher than the normal swara
positions. But now at the end of the experiment the Chala Veena is four 
shrutis lower than the earlier position. So now Shadja of Chala Veena has 
shifted to four shrutis lower position i.e. the natural position of Shadja 
swara. Similarly, all the remaining swaras also attain their natural 
positions and thus now it is in its own natural octave. If you tune back the 
Achala Veena to natural swara positions of Chala Veena then the Achala 
Veena will also attain the natural swara positions. Since the shruti
positions are marked on the Achala Veena all the shrutis are now at their 
natural positions and both the Veenas are now in their natural octave. 
Thus the beauty of the whole description unfolds if we connect the `swarasthapana’ process to the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment. 
एवमेतेन ौुितिनदशर्नेन द्वौ मिमक्यौ द्वािवंशितौतयः ु ूत्यवगन्तव्या| [Bharata, p. 20] 
As a result of this `Shruti Nidarshanam’ experiment twenty two shrutis of 
two Gramas can be experienced or demonstrated [Bharata, p. 20]. 
A very important insight from the experiment is that the `ShrutiNidarshanam’ experiment is successful if and only if the twenty two 
shrutis are having equal temperament. This is the unique condition of 
`Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment. If they are not having equal 
temperament then the mapping will go haywire. Logically and
mathematically this is the only possibility. If the shrutis are not equidistanced then they will not map evenly or they will map on extra 
68 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
positions and generate more number of shrutis or less number of shrutis
depending on the ratios. Swara positions of Chala Veena will not map on 
the seven swaras of Achala Veena evenly if shrutis are not equi-distanced. 
That is why Bharata puts a strict condition that Chala Veena and Achala 
Veena, both should be exactly similar in all respects. Then only one can 
conduct this experiment. He does not clearly mentions that the shrutis
should be equi-distanced because the experiment begins with seven 
swaras and not with shrutis. In Bharata’s system shrutis are equal 
temperament shrutis while swaras do not have equal temperament. If the 
swaras are fixed on appropriate places then at the end of the experiment it 
will result into twenty two equal temperament shrutis. The `ShrutiNidarshanam’ experiment is such a profound paradigm that one gets awestruck by the elegance and precision of the experiment. Only a musical 
genius having mathematical and logical bent of mind can design such an 
experiment. 
5.5 Shruti-Nidarshanam on Veena: Demonstrating Shrutis
on Veena
Bharata’s Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment is a definitive way to 
demonstrate equal temperament twenty two shrutis. Sharangadeva also 
has another version of Shruti- Nidarshanam experiment which will be 
discussed later in this monograph. Both the experiments are discussed 
thoroughly in this monograph. There is one more possibility to 
demonstrate shrutis on a Veena. In both the Shruti Nidarshanam
experiments we need two equally tuned Veenas while it is possible to 
demonstrate shrutis on single Veena/ Sitar. For this experiment we need 
to modify Veena/ Sitar with having twenty two frets in an octave. We may 
call this Veena/ Sitar with twenty two frets in every octave as `Shruti 
Veena’. Veena has four strings (if a Sitar is used then we can use additional 
strings to establish Madhyama Grama/ Gandhara Grama etc.). Tune the 
first string of a Veena in the lower Shadja swara (Kharja) while the fourth 
string needs to be tuned in lower Panchama. The middle two strings are 
tuned in the middle Shadja swara. Twenty two shrutis can be 
demonstrated on these two middle strings. First tune the Shruti Veena
appropriately as mentioned above- first string in lower Shadja, fourth in 
lower Panchama swara and the middle two strings in middle Shadja 
swara. Then raise both the middle strings to Chatu-shruti Rishabha swara. 
Now consider the second string as Achala string and the third string as 
69 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Chala string (using the terminology of Bharata). We need to follow the 
description of Bharata’s Shruti Nidarshanam experiment in a step-by-step 
manner on these two strings (detailed description of each step of the 
experiment is not mentioned here to avoid repetition since Bharata’s 
experiment is already discussed thoroughly). The second string in this 
experiment acts as an Achala Veena and the third string acts as a Chala 
Veena of Bharata’s experiment. At the end of the experiment the third 
string will be lowered by four shrutis i.e. it will be tuned to middle Shadja 
swara. Then tune in the second string into this Shadja. The frets will help 
in ascertaining the shruti positions on Chala and Achala strings as it 
happens with Chala and Achala Veenas of Bharata. This is a simpler and 
contemporary version of Bharata’s Shruti Nidarshanam experiment. For 
such an experiment we need to make a special Veena having equal 
temperament twenty two frets in every octave. We can have fixed frets 
like a Veena or movable frets like a Sitar. Movable frets can really help in 
exploring various possibilities of un-equal shruti positions. Eventually the 
experiment will prove that Bharata’s Shruti Nidarshanam experiment is 
valid only for equal temperament shrutis and thus substantiates the case 
for equal temperament twenty two shrutis. 
It is interesting to see that Bharata himself has not devised the seven 
swaras. Bharata’s seven swaras have origins in the Vedic accents. Initial 
Udatta, Anudatta and Swarita accents were accommodated by Bharata 
into seven swaras as discussed earlier. Naradiya Shiksha mentions seven 
swaras of Samaveda but also mentions few more swaras. Naradiya Shiksha
does not mention the twenty two shrutis. Bharata inherited the Vedic 
swara positions and assimilated the prevalent swara positions during his 
times and came up with a paradigm of twenty two shrutis. How these 
complex processes of assimilation from Vedic swaras, swaras of Samaveda 
and Naradiya Shiksha eventually culminated into Bharata’s equi-distanced 
twenty two shrutis is a miracle. The major challenge happens to be this 
mathematically precise experiment of `Shruti Nidarshanam’ that leads to 
laying down foundations for the domain of Indian music. Bharata’s 
paradigm of equal temperament twenty two shruti is not a hypothetical 
mathematical construct. On the other hand it was a profound practical 
paradigm till the times of Abhinavagupta and Sharangadeva i.e. till the 
thirteenth century A.D. at least. 
 
70 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
71 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
6. SHRUTI ACCORDING TO SANGITA RATNAKARA 
Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva is considered as one of the most 
reliable treatise on ancient music. After Naradiya Shiksha and Bharata’s 
Natyashastra, this is the treatise that is highly respected by all the 
musicologists of India irrespective of their own styles and affiliations to 
Gharanas/ school of thoughts. It is a compilation of musical knowledge of 
India during twelfth century. It is quite comprehensive treatise that 
provides thorough insights about music. The treatise Sangita Ratnakar is 
organized as follows. It has seven Adhyayas or chapters. Within each 
chapter there are Prakaranas or sub-chapters which are composed of 
shlokas. Most of the discussion on shruti is in the first chapter. Although 
the term shruti appears in the first shloka of the first Prakarana (subchapter) of the first Adhyaya (chapter) more detailed discussion about 
shruti comes in the third Prakarana (sub-chapter) of the first Adhyaya
(chapter). Description of swaras and shrutis for worldly music begins from 
the seventh and the eighth shlokas. It states that sound is articulated in 
three ways. It starts at the core of heart and is called `Mandra’ i.e. lower 
octave sound, the second level of articulation is called `Madhya’ i.e. middle 
octave sound and the third is called `Taara’ i.e. higher octave sound and 
each one is twice higher than the previous one. It means that musicians of 
those days were aware about the relative ratios of octaves. It further says 
that there are twenty two finely differentiable varieties of sounds called 
shrutis in an octave. 
व्यवहारे त्वसौ ऽेधा हृिद मन्िोऽिभधीयते | कण्ठे मध्यो मूिध्नर् तारो िद्वगुणश्चोत्तरोत्तरः ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-7] 
In music, production sound that is used is of three types. The sound that is 
produced by deep breathing around the region of heart is called `Mandra’ 
while sound that is produced through vocal cords is called `Madhya’. The 
third type of sound is produced in the region of nasal cavities is called 
72 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
`Tara’. Each of this sound is double in pitch than the previous one 
[Sharangadeva, p. 55]. 
तःय द्वािवंशितभदाः ेर् ौवणात् ौुतयो मताः | ॑ुद्यूध्वनाडीस र् ंलग्ना नाड्यो द्वािवंशितमताः र् ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-8] 
Each of such sound is divided into twenty two distinguishable microtones. 
These are called `Shrutis’. These are associated with twenty two energy 
channels located in the region of heart [Sharangadeva, p. 56]. 
In Indian tradition music is considered as a device for Yogic meditation. 
This shloka has a contextual reference to Yogic concept of `Nadi’. Nadi is an 
energy channel. In Yoga (especially Hatha Yoga) it is assumed that there 
exist thousands of energy channels in the body. During the Yogic 
meditation a Yogi activates these channels. This shloka describes that 
there exist twenty two energy channels in the region of heart that are 
associated with a major energy channel called `Urdhva Nadi’. 
6.1 Shruti and Swara-Sthapana (Establishing microtones 
and musical notes on Veena) 
Shloka number ten onwards of the third sub-chapter of the first chapter is 
a description of demonstration of establishing swaras and shrutis and then 
demonstrating the existence of twenty two shrutis in a definite way. As the 
description goes Sharangadeva says, first take two exactly similar Veenas, 
and tune them with precision. Each of these Veenas should have twenty 
two strings. Tune the first string in such a way that it should produce 
lowest possible but clearly audible and distinguishable sound. Thus the 
first shruti is established. Then tune the second string of each Veena in 
such a way that the sound of the second string is slightly higher but clearly 
distinguishable from the sound of the previous string. This string stands 
for the second shruti. One needs to take care that no significant 
distinguishable sound be heard between these two shrutis. Thus again 
Sharangadeva recommends to tune strings of Veena using the sensitivity 
of ears. It seems that during ancient times, musicians were so accustomed 
with tuning instruments by sensitivity of ears that it appears to be very 
common practice. Even today also while tuning musical instruments 
musicians rely more on sensitivity of ears though now-a-days they take 
help of Harmonium or other electronic devices. Sharangadeva further says 
73 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
tune all the remaining strings of both the Veenas in the same way and 
establish twenty two shrutis. 
द्वे वीणे सदृशौ कायेर्यथा नादः समो भवेत | ् तयोद्वािवर् ंशितःतन्त्र्यः ूत्येकं तासुचािदमा ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-11] 
कायार्मन्ितमध्वाना िद्वतीयोच्चध्विनमनाकर् ् | ःयािन्नरन्तरता ौुत्योमध्यर् ेध्वन्यन्तराौुतेः || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-12] 
First, take two exactly similar Veenas, traditional Indian string 
instruments, and tune them with precision. Each of these Veenas should 
have twenty two strings. Tune the first string in such a way that it should 
produce lowest possible but clearly audible and distinguishable sound. 
Thus the first shruti is established. Then tune the second string of each 
Veena in such a way that the sound of the second string is slightly higher 
but clearly distinguishable from the sound of the previous string. This 
string stands for the second shruti. One needs to take care that no 
significant distinguishable sound be heard between these two shrutis 
[Sharangadeva, p. 57]. In the above description, the second line of the 
shloka is very important. The word `nirantarata’ in this context means 
consistency. It says there should be consistency among shrutis. This 
consistency is of the audible difference between shrutis. Such a 
consistency is possible only if the shrutis are equi-distanced/ equal 
temperament. In any other case such a consistency is not possible. 
Therefore it is certain that during Sharangadeva’s times shrutis were 
considered to have equal temperament. 
अधराधरतीोाःताःतज्जो नादः ौुितमतः र् | वीणाद्वये ःवराः ःथाप्याःतऽ षड्जश्चतुःौितः ु ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-13] 
Tune all the remaining strings of both the Veenas in the same way and 
establish twenty two shrutis. Sound of the strings becomes sharper and 
sharper as you go on tuning the strings in a sequential manner. Such 
sequentially arranged sounds are called shrutis [Sharangadeva, p. 57]. 
The word `adharadhara’ is very important here. It means change of sound 
is gradual. It means as you go on tuning strings one after other, the sound 
of strings becomes gradually sharper and sharper. It clearly suggests that 
since the aural difference between the first string and the second string is 
of one shruti, by following same method of tuning, remaining strings 
should be tuned gradually by maintaining the one shruti difference among 
74 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
rest of the strings. This description by Sharangadeva clearly states that the 
twenty two shrutis have to be tuned with equal temperament. Earlier it is 
mentioned that pitch of the second octave (Shadja) should be double as 
compared to the pitch of the first octave (Shadja). So once all the shrutis 
are tuned, it is possible to cross-check whether the tuning is appropriate 
or not. Thus from Bharata’s times to Sharangadeva’s times shrutis were 
tuned equi-distanced. Even as earlier said, Abhinavagupta also mentions 
that shruti distances are `Niyata’ or equal. 
Once these shrutis are established, Shadja and other swaras can be 
established. Shadja is supposed to be on the fourth string and then 
establish other swaras as mentioned in following shlokas. 
ःथाप्यःतन्त्र्यां तुरीयायामषभिस्तर्ौ ृ ितःततः ु | पञ्चमीतःततीयाया ृ ं गांधारो िद्वौितःततः ु ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-14] 
अष्टमीतो िद्वतीयायां मध्यमोऽथ चतुःौितः ु | दशमीतश्चतुथ्यार्ं ःयात्पञ्चमोऽथ चतुः ौुितः|| 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-15] 
चतुदर्शीतःतुयाया र् ंधैवतिस्तर्ौितःततः ु | अष्टादँयाःततीयाया ृ ंिनषादो िद्वौितःततः ु || [Sangita 
Ratnakara:1-3-16] 
Then establish Rishabha on seventh string, Gandhara on ninth string, 
Madhyama on thirteenth string, Panchama on seventeenth string, 
Dhaivata on twentieth string, and finally, Nishada on the last string i.e. 
twenty second strings. For the next stage of the process of demonstrating 
shrutis, treat one of these Veenas as a `Achala’ or fixed/ stable Veena and 
the other one as a `Chala’ i.e. changeable Veena [Sharangadeva, p. 58]. 
6.2 Shruti-Nidarshanam According to Sangita Ratnakara
 Sharangadeva also explains the process of demonstrating shrutis in a 
certain and definite way. The process is same though the details are 
slightly different than the Shruti-Nidarshanam process of Bharata. The 
process of demonstrating shrutis is very subtle and therefore should be 
performed with due care. Only a knowledgeable person who has very 
keen sense of tuning is capable of performing this experiment. The 
description goes on as follows. 
75 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
एकिवंँया िद्वतीयायां वीणैकाऽऽ ीुवा भवेत | ् चलवीणा िद्वतीया तुतःयां तन्ऽीःतुसारयेत || ्
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-17]
ःवोपान्त्यतन्ऽीमानेयाःतःयां सप्त ःवरा बुधैः | ीुववीणाःवरेभ्योऽःयां चलायां तेःवरःतदा || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-18] 
एकौत्यपक ु ृष्टाः ःयुरेवमन्याऽिप सारणा | ौुितद्वयलयादःयां चलवीणागतौ गनी || [Sangita 
Ratnakara:1-3-19] 
ीुववीणोपगतयो िरधयोिवशतः र् बमात | ् तृतीयःयां सारणायां िवशतः सपयो िरधौ || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-20] 
िनगमेषु चतुथ्यार्ं तु िवशिन्त समपाः बमात | ् ौुितद्वािवंशतावेवं सारणानां चतुष्टयात || ्
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-21] 
Once the swaras are established on both the Veenas then reduce all the 
seven swaras by one shruti on the Chala Veena. This is called first sarana. 
Again follow the same method of reducing all seven swaras by one shruti. 
After the second sarana, Gandhara and Nishada of the chala Veena will 
tune in with the Rishabha and Dhaivata of the achala Veena respectively 
because Gandhara and Nishada are reduced by two shrutis each on Achala 
Veena. Now as a part of the sarana process, reduce all the seven swaras
again by one shruti so that Rishabha and Dhaivata of Chala Veena will tune 
in with the Shadja and Panchama of the Achala Veena respectively. This is 
called third sarana. In the fourth sarana, by reducing all the seven swaras
once again by one shruti, Shadja, Madhyama and Panchama of Chala Veena
will merge into Nishada, Gandhara and Madhyama of the Achala Veena
respectively. Thus, the twenty two shrutis are demonstrated 
[Sharangadeva, pp. 60-61]. In this experiment, at every stage or in every 
sarana, Chala Veena swaras are reduced by one shruti each and 
simultaneously, shrutis are mapped on the Achala Veena for 
demonstration of all the twenty two shrutis. The number of shrutis thus 
generated and demonstrated is exactly twenty two, not less nor more. 
There are some interesting observations. At the time of swara-sthapana, 
twenty two strings are tuned and seven out of them are selected as 
swaras. Sharangadeva in the process of Shruti-Nidarshanam asks to 
reduce seven swaras of a Chala Veena by one shruti. But he does not 
mention what happens to the remaining strings on which swaras are not 
established. It opens up many possibilities. So this experiment of ShrutiNidarshanam is different as compared to Bharata’s experiment. With a 
76 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
close scrutiny of this experiment it is clear that again it’s a mapping 
process. In Bharata’s experiment new shrutis are generated and mapped 
on the Achala Veena. In Sharangadeva’s experiment shrutis are not newly 
generated because shrutis are already established on twenty two strings. 
Seven swaras of Chala Veena are mapped on the pre-existing shrutis or 
strings of Achala Veena. Again it is logical to say that unless the shrutis on 
the twenty two strings of Achala Veena are equi-distanced, the experiment 
will not succeed. By reducing seven swaras by one-shruti distance every 
time, they will map on pre-existing strings respectively since the shrutis 
have to be equi-distanced. If the shrutis are un-equally established then 
seven swaras will require new places (but actually there are no extra 
strings available to map) on the Achala Veena and will generate extra 
shrutis that goes against the magic number twenty two. Therefore, as per 
Sharangadeva’s experiment of `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ shrutis have to be 
equi-distanced. Thus it is concluded that from Bharata’s times to 
Sharangadeva’s times shrutis were equi-distanced or equal temperament. 
ौुितभ्यः ःयुः ःवराः षड्जषभगा र् ंधारमध्यमाः | पञ्चमो धैवतश्चाथ िनषाद इित सप्त ते ||
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-23] 
Swaras originate from these shrutis. There are such seven swaras, namely, 
Shadja, Rishabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Panchama, Dhaivata and Nishada. 
[Sharangadeva, p. 65]. This shloka is important because in clear terms it 
says that swaras originate from shrutis. So as discussed earlier that 
whether shrutis originate from swaras or swaras originate from shrutis
was a major issue of debate among modern scholars. This shloka 
addresses that issue in clear terms. 
6.3 Integrating Shrutis of Naradiya Shiksha into Bharata’s 
Paradigm 
Once shrutis and swaras are established Sharangadeva proceeds further 
and describes the types of shrutis. He borrows the scheme of typification 
of shrutis from Naradiya Shiksha and applies it to twenty two shrutis thus 
established. Naradiya Shiksha defines types of shrutis on the basis of 
subtle sonar qualities of a swara and a swara can have five such shades or 
such qualities. However, Sharangadeva defines shruti as pitch positions by 
following Bharata’s paradigm and thus defines types of shrutis also as 
pitch positions but it is quite likely that these pitch positions have specific 
77 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
sonar qualities. The concept of shrutis from Bharata’s times has changed. 
Shrutis were considered as pitch positions in Bharata’s Natyashastra. 
Sharangadeva follows the same definition of shrutis as distinct pitch 
positions in an octave and specific pitch positions are selected as swaras. 
But it does not mean that the concept of shruti in Naradiya Shiksha was 
wrong. Shrutis are pitch positions but they do have certain sonar qualities 
achieved due to modulations. So Sharangadeva tries to integrate both the 
perspectives in his scheme. Sharangadeva assigns a particular type or 
sonar quality (shruti type as per Naradiya Shiksha) to an individual shruti
or pitch position. Therefore according to him these are not subtle shades 
of swara pitch but are independent shruti positions which possess a 
particular sonar quality. So in his scheme of swaras/ shrutis there is a 
hierarchy. Swaras are prominent and certain number of shrutis belong to 
them since these come within their range. Each of these shrutis has certain 
dominant sonar quality assigned. This dominant quality is identified as 
one of the types mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha. One can assume that 
Sharangadeva must have arrived at this decision on his own or on the 
basis of a consensus among the practitioners. There is a striking difference 
between understanding of the concept of shruti in Naradiya Shiksha and 
Sangita Ratnakar. It may have strong reference to Bharata’s legacy and 
prevalent practice of shruti rendering those days. The textual description 
reflects this. The most significant contribution of Sharangadeva in this 
regard is that he has provided a name-list of all twenty two shrutis. 
Bharata developed a paradigm of twenty two shrutis but he has not given 
names to shrutis. By the time of Sharangadeva, probably musicians have 
developed more insights about emotional and aesthetic properties of 
twenty two shrutis. Probably Sharangadeva’s name-list of shrutis has 
attempted to capture these aesthetic properties of shrutis. 
िनधार्यर्तेऽतः ौुतयःपूवार्अप्यऽ हेतवः | दीप्ताऽऽयता च करुणा मृदमर् ु ध्येित जातयः || [Sangita 
Ratnakara:1-3-27] 
Swaras are defined by the specific shruti and its certain previous shrutis
and therefore it is assumed that swaras are defined by all of them. There 
are five Jatis or types of shrutis. These are known as Dipta, Aayata, 
Karuna, Mrudu and Madhya. Thus according to Sharangadeva swara is not 
just a pitch position but the entire range of previous shrutis on which the 
swara has jurisdiction [Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
78 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
ौुतीनां पञ्च तासां च ःवरेंवेवं व्यविःथितः | दीप्ताऽऽयता मृदमर् ु ध्या षड्जेःयादृषभेपुनः || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-28] 
The five shruti types are appropriately assigned to shrutis that come 
within respective swaras. The four shrutis of Shadja are known as Dipta, 
Aayata, Mrudu and Madhya respectively. Shrutis of Rishabha are 
mentioned next. [Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
संिःथता करुणा मध्या मृदगा ु धारक र्ं े पुनः | दीप्ताऽऽयते मध्यमे ते मृदमर् ु ध्ये च संिःथते || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-29] 
Rishabha has Karuna, Madhya and Mrudu shrutis while Gandhara has 
Dipta and Aayata shrutis. Again Madhyama has Dipta and Aayata Shruti as 
well as Mrudu and Madhya shrutis also reside there. [Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
मृदमर् ु ध्याऽऽयताऽऽख्या च करुणा पञ्चमेिःथता | करुणा च आयता मध्या धैवतेसप्तमेपुनः|| 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-30] 
Mrudu, Madhya, Aayata and Karuna respectively are known as the shrutis
of Panchama. Similarly Karuna, Aayata and Madhya are the shrutis of 
Dhaivata. The seventh swara – Nishada’ shrutis are mentioned next. 
[Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
दीप्ता मध्येित तासां च जातीनां ॄूमहे िभदाः | तीोा रौिी विळकोमेत्युक्ता दीप्ता चतुिवधा र् || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-31] 
Nishada has, thus, Dipta and Madhya shrutis. The Shrutis are distributed 
according to shruti jatis as mentioned next. Teevra, Rudra, Vajrika and 
Ugra fall under Dipta jati [Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
कु मुद्वत्यायता याऽःयाः बोधा चाथ ूसािरणी | संदीपनी रोिहणी च भेदाः पञ्चेित कीितताः र् || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-32] 
Kumudvati, Krodha, Prasarini, Sandipani and Rohini are part of the Aayata 
jati. [Sharangadeva, p. 70]. 
दयावती तथाऽऽलािपन्यथ ूोक्ता मदिन्तका | ऽयःतेकरुणाभेदा मृदोभदचत ेर् ुष्टयम || ् [Sangita 
Ratnakara:1-3-33] 
79 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Dayavati, Aalapini and Madantika are the three shrutis which are 
considered as part of Karuna jati. Mrudu jati has four shrutis as mentioned 
next. [Sharangadeva, p. 71]. 
मन्दा च रितका ूीितःिक्षितमध्या र् तुषिड्वधा | छन्दोवती रञ्जनी च माजनी र् रिक्तका तथा || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-34] 
Thus Manda, Raktika, Preeti and Kshiti fall under Mrudu jati. The Madhya 
jati has six shrutis under it. Chhandovati, Ranjani, Marjani and Raktika fall 
under Madhya as well as two more as mentioned next. [Sharangadeva, p. 
71]. 
रम्या च क्षोिभणीत्यासामथ ॄूमः ःवरिःथितम | ् तीोाकु मुद्वतीमन्दाच्छन्दोवत्यःतुषड्जगाः || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-35] 
Ramya and Kshobhini fall under Madhya jati. Now begins the description 
of positions of shrutis in relation to each swaras. Teevra, Kumudvati, 
Manda and Chhandovati fall under Shadja swara. [Sharangadeva, p. 71]. 
दयावती रञ्जनी च रिक्तका चषर्भे िःथताः | रौिी बोधा च गांधारे विळकाऽथ ूसािरणी || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-36] 
Dayavati, Ranjani and Raktika stay with Rishabha swara. Raudri and 
Krodha shrutis belong to Gandhara swara. Vajrika and Prasarini belong to 
Madhyama and there are two more. [Sharangadeva, p. 71]. 
ूीितश्च माजनीत्य र् ेताः ौुतयो मध्यमािौताः | िक्षती रक्ता च संदीपन्यालािपन्यिप पञ्चमे || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-37] 
Preeti and Marjani are the two remaining shrutis of Madhyama. Kshiti, 
Rakta, Sandipani and Aalapini reside with Panchama swara. 
[Sharangadeva, p. 71]. 
मदन्ती रोिहणी रम्येत्येतािःतॐःतुधैवते | उमा च क्षोिभणीित द्वे िनषादे वसतः ौुती || 
[Sangita Ratnakara:1-3-38] 
Madanti, Rohini and Ramya are the three shrutis of Dhaivata. Ugra and 
Kshobhini reside with Nishada swara. [Sharangadeva, p. 71]. 
Thus the allocation of shrutis with swaras is complete. Sharangadeva 
meticulously adheres to the swara and shruti division described by 
Bharata. He is perfectly within Bharata’s paradigm. In the above 
80 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
description he attempts to smoothly integrate concept of shruti from 
Naradiya Shiksha in the Bharata’s paradigm. Following is the table that 
gives an overview of the above-mentioned description of shrutis by 
Sharangadeva. The table gives the description of shrutis- their names, jatis, 
old swara names and also the modern swara names. According to 
Bharata’s paradigm of shrutis, the Shadja swara is located on the fourth 
shruti. Therefore, all the following tables begin with the fourth shruti. 
S.N. Shruti
Names 
ShrutiJati 
Old Swara
Names 
Present Swara Names
4. Chhandovati Madhya Shadja Shadja
5. Dayavati Karuna
6. Ranjani Madhya Komal Rishabha
7. Raktika Mrudu Bharata’s 
Rishabha 
8. Roudri Dipta Chatuh shruti 
Rishabha 
Shuddha Rishabha
9. Krodha Aayata Bharata’s 
Gandhara 
10. Vajrika Dipta Sadharana 
Gandhara 
Komal Gandhara
11. Prasarini Aayata Antar 
Gandhara 
Gandhara
12. Priti Mrudu
13. Marjani Madhya Madhyama Madhyama
14. Kshiti Mrudu
15. Rakta Madhya Prati 
Madhyama 
Teevra Madhyama
16. Sandipani Aayata Chyuta 
Panchama 
17. Aalapini Karuna Panchama Panchama
18. Madanti Karuna 
19. Rohini Aayata Komal Dhaivata
20. Ramya Madhya Bharata’s 
Dhaivata 
21. Ugra Dipta Dhaivata
22. Kshobhini Madhya Bharata’ 
Nishada 
81 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
1. Teevra Dipta Kaishiki 
Nishada 
Komal Nishada
2. Kumudvati Aayata Kakali Nishada Nishada
3. Manda Mrudu Chyuta Shadja 
4. Chhandovati Madhya Tara Shadja Tara Shadja 
Table No. 1 
Shruti jatis are mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha but they are not mentioned 
in Bharata’s Natyashastra. Also there is no mention of twenty two shrutis
in Naradiya Shiksha. Even the names of shrutis are not mentioned by 
Bharata. The names of shrutis first appear in Sangita Ratnakar of 
Sharangadeva but its true source is not known. A closer analysis of the 
allocation of shrutis to swaras as well as jatis will lead to the feeling that 
Sharangadeva has attempted to integrate Bharata’s theory of shrutis as 
well as earlier views on shrutis described in Naradiya Shiksha. Probably 
this integration might have reference to actually prevalent musical 
practices of that era. 
It is possible to decipher the logic behind this integration with the help of 
above table. Except Rishabha, Gandhara and Panchama, Madhya shruti jati
is assigned to all the remaining swaras as their normal shruti position by 
Sharangadeva. Mrudu shruti is always lower than the Madhya jati except 
Bharata’s Rishabha. Similarly position of Aayata is higher than the Madhya
or Dipta (Dipta replaces Madhya in some cases) shruti jati which is again 
properly assigned except Panchama. Panchama has a Karuna shruti which 
is a special case. Naradiya Shiksha does not mention the exact position of 
Dipta and Karuna shruti and therefore, Sharangadeva keeps them floating 
or by replacing Madhya or Mrudu shruti jati. In the case of Panchama 
swara, Karuna has replaced Madhya jati completely. In most of the cases 
Dipta and Karuna are kept lower than the Aayata shruti jati. All this is 
understandable and seems logical. 
The integration is quite successful but there are few weak points where it 
does not match with the textual references from Naradiya Shiksha on one 
hand and raises questions about practical application of rendering shrutis
according to this scheme. The first major discord occurs as it is mentioned 
in Naradiya Shiksha that Dwitiya swara i.e. Gandhara has Dipta shruti and 
three other shrutis as Mrudu, Madhya and Aayata. But in Bharata’s scheme 
of shrutis, Bharata’s Gandhara has been assigned only two shrutis. So how 
four shruti jatis be assigned to Gandhara? So Sharangadeva assigned two 
shruti jatis to the two shrutis of Gandhara- Dipta and Aayata respectively. 
82 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Then he again assigned same shruti jatis- Dipta and Aayata shruti jatis to 
Sadharana Gandhara and Antara Gandhara respectively. But in the 
process Mrudu and Madhya shruti jatis have not been assigned to any of 
the Gandhara. Therefore there is a mis-match between textual description 
of Naradiya Shiksha and Sharangadeva’s scheme of assigning shruti jatis to 
Gandhara swara. Another important issue is that, can these shruti jatis be 
assigned to individual shruti-places described in Natyashastra? From the 
description of Naradiya Shiksha shruti jatis are the finer qualities or 
microtonal variations of a swara. It cannot be extended up to two-shruti
distance or three/four-shruti distances. This will pose a problem in actual 
rendering of swaras. It is said in Naradiya Shiksha that Dwitiya swara i.e. 
Gandhara has Dipta shruti. In this scheme to have Dipta shruti for 
Gandhara one has to shift to either Chatuh-shruti Rishabha or Sadharana 
Gandhara which themselves are quite prominent notes. It means that if 
one is rendering a Dipta shruti jati for Gandhara then actually one is not 
rendering Bharata’s Gandhara but either Chatuh-shruti Rishabha(Naradiya 
Shiksha treats it as a `Swaara’ or a wrong note) or Sadharana Gandhara. 
Same happens with Bharata’s Nishada swara. This can create practical 
problem of rendering shruti jatis for swaras if Sharangadeva’s scheme is 
followed. However, in spite of certain weaknesses in Sharangadeva’s 
scheme one can say that this scheme provides some vital insights about 
shruti jatis. Following inferences can be drawn from the above-mentioned 
scheme. 
 Firstly, Mrudu jati is lower than the Madhya jati. 
 Secondly, Aayata jati is higher than the Madhya jati. This is 
evident from the above description. 
 Dipta and Karuna jatis are floating pitch positions and can replace 
Madhya jati. 
 Karuna can also be higher than Madhya and lower than the 
Aayata jati. 
 Dipta can be lower or higher than Madhya jati. 
 As mentioned by Bhatta Shobhakara, in the case of Chaturtha 
swara or Shadja, Dipta shruti jati can be softer or Mrudu (Mrudu 
bhootah). Thus Dipta can replace Mrudu jati or can be closer to it 
(Mrudu-Madhya). 
 With these inferences it becomes easier to clarify the concept of 
shruti jatis mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha. 
83 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Thus Sharangadeva’s scheme of integration of the concepts of shruti from 
Naradiya Shiksha is partially successful and provides some vital insights 
about the understanding about shrutis during his times. His major 
contribution lies in providing a name-list of twenty two shrutis. His ShrutiNidarshanam experiment is different from Bharata’s experiment but 
arrives at the same conclusion. In this sense one must appreciate his 
innovation of Bharata’s experiment. Most importantly he comes up with 
clarity about establishing shrutis on two Veenas having twenty two strings 
each and then establishing swaras on them. His procedure of establishing 
shrutis and swaras clearly indicates that twenty two shrutis were with 
equal temperament. 
 
84 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
85 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
7. COMPUTING AND RECONSTRUCTING SHRUTIS 
Throughout the discussion so far it is established that from the ancient 
times to Sharangadeva’s times i.e. till 13th century, shrutis were considered 
as equal temperament. During medieval period questions were raised 
about the exact nature of shrutis by musicologists. In the modern times 
musicologists have almost refuted the paradigm of equal temperament 
twenty two shrutis and started coming up with diverse theories and 
models. The present monograph, taking into account the perspectives of 
Naradiya Shiksha, Natyashastra and Sangita Ratnakar, now attempts to 
critically analyze the phenomenon of shrutis or microtones in Indian 
music from modern perspectives. Eventually this monograph proposes a 
broader frame-work for understanding the phenomenon of shrutis in 
Indian music. 
7.1 Music as a Psycho-acoustic phenomenon 
Music making and music perception are phenomena that are neither 
purely scientific nor mathematical nor purely psychological. Shrutiperception is a psycho-acoustic phenomenon. The scholars, in recent 
times, focused only on the physics of music and applied mathematical 
formulations to understand shrutis. Even the `just intonation’ scale is also 
a purely mathematical construct, however, elegant and logical it is, in 
musical practice, the most popular scale in contemporary music happens 
to be the equal temperament scale for various pragmatic reasons. It shows 
that, in the musical research in general and shruti-research in particular, 
there is an undue emphasis on mathematical formulations and 
mathematical precision. 
It is a common experience when a musician plays a musical note; it is 
never a pure frequency. Musical note is a collection of multiple 
frequencies with varying amplitude/ volume. Every time a musician plays 
86 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
the same note, there will be a minute variation in its physical parameters. 
In spite of variations in the physical parameters every time, musicians as 
well as the audience consider it as the same musical note or a swara. 
Therefore, at some level of musical perception, an abstraction and 
approximation takes place and musical perception is complete. Music 
perception is not mathematically precise and perfect as it is assumed. It is 
claimed that musicians are trained enough to sense the difference 
between frequencies up to multiple decimal points and it may be true. 
Even with digital technology it is possible to produce music with the 
precision up to multiple decimal points and technically it is possible to 
distinguish also. But when two musical notes are played in a harmony or 
consecutively in a melodious tune, this level of precision is unwarranted. 
Because music making is not about precision, it is about creating musical 
experience where perceptive processes are important. Thus the 
contemporary equal temperament scale of twelve notes is good enough to 
create the desired musical experience to which musicians as well as the 
audience adapt. The equal temperament scale provides the necessary 
frame-work or a template to generate desired musical experience. Even in 
this case also, a musician should not be precise or perfectly tuned with 
equal temperament. It may be argued that such an absence of precision 
generates a microtonal dissonance that adds to the aural aesthetics of 
music but this issue is beyond the scope of this monograph. 
Musical experience is a holistic phenomenon, when for instance, Tanapura
(a drone instrument) strings are plucked, multiple frequencies and upper 
partials or overtones are generated following the laws of physics. The 
strongest frequencies up to tenth to fifteenth harmonics dominate our 
musical experience. The rest do exist but have lesser impact. However, 
apart from these physically produced overtones and harmonics, human 
ears perceive many more tones which are actually not there. Perception of 
`swayambhu Gandhara’ and many other such so called `swayambhu’ 
swaras belong to this category. This is due to the phenomenon called 
`missing fundamentals’. Human ears due to their structure and perception 
mechanism are capable of inferring and generating the lower partials of 
the heard frequencies. This is due to the auditory or aural inference 
mechanism. It’s a pure psycho-acoustic phenomenon. Thus, musical 
perception is a highly complex phenomenon composed of physical sounds 
those are there, psycho-acoustically inferred sounds which are not there 
but inferred by ears, and previous musical experiences, musical
knowledge as well as the cultural context of the listener. 
87 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Experiential complexities of musical perception defy physics and 
mathematics in many ways. The phenomenon of musical consonance is 
well-known. Accordingly, the musical note of `Sa’ or `Shadja’ is considered 
consonant with the higher `Sa’. Also a musical note called `Pa’ is also 
considered consonant with the `Sa’. In Indian music it is known as `ShadjaShadja Bhava’ and the `Shadja-Panchama Bhava’ respectively. The ShadjaShadja consonance means if two musical notes have frequencies having 
ratio of 2/1 then they are considered consonant with each other. 
Similarly, if two musical notes have frequency ratio of 3/2 then there 
exists `Shadaj-Pancham Bhava’ between them and they are also 
considered consonant with each other. Musicians found that if two 
musical notes have simple frequency ratios such as 2/1, 3/2, 4/3, 5/4, 6/5 
and so on then such notes are consonant with each other though, the 
degree of consonance will reduce sequentially. The well-known scale 
called the `just intonation’ scale of music is based on this logic. 
Musicologists in the West and India started extending this logic for further 
mathematical formulations in music. That led to the tendency of seeking 
mathematical precision in music. Over the period, musicians have started 
to realize that all the musical consonances are not mathematically so 
precise. They do not follow these mathematical ratios so meticulously. For 
example, if the frequency of `Sa’ is 240 hertz, then the frequency of the 
higher `Sa’ should be 480 hertz as per the mathematical ratio. However, 
with the use of computational technology now it can be experimentally 
proved that the actual consonant frequency of the higher `Sa’ happens to 
be 481.208 hertz. Same is the case with `Shadja-Panchama Bhava’. If `Sa’ 
has a frequency of 240 hertz then `Pa’ should have the frequency of 360 
hertz but in reality the consonant `Pa’ has a frequency of 361.6157 hertz 
[Thakar, S., p. 27 ]. This experiment was conducted by a vocalist, Dr. 
Sulabha Thakar who belongs to Kirana Gharana that is known for 
rendering musical notes with high precision. She has also used computers 
to generate precise values of swaras in her experiment. This suggests that 
when it comes to the musical consonance, the mathematical ratios are not 
applicable with such a precision. There exists a minute displacement or 
shift in consonant frequency. It is also noticed that while relating one note 
to its higher consonant note this displacement is towards higher side i.e. 
the consonant note is displaced further. So 240 hertz, frequency note 
seeks consonance with 481.208 hertz (displacement of 1.208 hertz 
towards higher side). It is to be noted here, that as per Bharata’s equal 
temperament scale Panchama’s shruti is slightly towards higher side than 
the logico-mathematical exact value of Panchama. This point will be 
88 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
discussed in more details at appropriate place. So with the help of highprecision computational technology, it can be argued that the logicomathematical ratios of consonance are not applicable with assumed 
precision. The musical consonance is governed by psycho-acoustic 
principles and aural inference and does not follow mathematical
precision. 
When a musical note seeks consonance towards lower side the resultant 
note happens to be more soft, delicate, broader, deep, emotional and 
pleasant. This quality of sound is called `Mardavatva’. When it seeks 
consonance toward higher side the resultant note is more voluminous, 
pointed, sharp, and bold. This is known as `Aayatatva’. Thus the musical 
consonance cannot be understood in terms of frequency ratios alone. 
Experimentally it can be seen that mathematical frequency values of 
musical notes are displaced and impacted by other sonar properties such 
as volume, timbre, attack, decay, resonance etc. So the resultant frequency 
is altered minutely due to above-mentioned factors. This brings in the 
point that the mathematical formulations are not completely wrong. 
Logical and mathematical formulations provide the essential basic 
structure to the aural/ musical calculus. The undue mathematical 
precision is unrealistic and unwarranted. Taking logico-musical
formulations as the base helps in providing theoretical foundations. The 
resultant values of musical frequencies then need to recalculate by 
considering the above-mentioned factors. The modified values of musical 
notes then will fulfill the psycho-acoustic expectations of consonance and 
attain the status of musical consonance. 
With the above considerations, it is a good idea to compare and evaluate 
select contemporary models of shrutis as well as Bharata’s twenty two 
shruti equal temperament scales. In this context two celebrated texts, as 
already thoroughly discussed, Bharata’s Natyashastra and Sangita 
Ratnakar of Sharangadeva are referred. Both these treatises clearly 
describe that the traditional ancient musical scale was an equal 
temperament scale consisting of twenty two shrutis. Especially the `ShrutiNidarshanam’ experiment is a conclusive proof of Bharata’s equal 
temperament scale as discussed in details earlier. However, some of the 
recent studies argue that Bharata’s scale is not relevant today as discussed 
in the following paragraphs [Komaragiri, pp. 140]. They tried to show that 
the distribution of Bharata’s twenty two shrutis among seven swaras of 
contemporary scales (contemporary swara positions are different) is not 
practical and leads to varied results in terms of number of shrutis. If the 
89 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
typical just intonation scale is used and the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’
experiment is performed then the number of shrutis generated would be 
twenty four and if the swara positions are altered then the number could 
vary drastically. As Mr. Madhu Mohan Komaragiri puts it- 
"…This shows that the 2-vīṇā experiment with changing intervals does not 
always yield 22 śruti-s. For unequal intervals, as the interval size varies, 
the 2-vīṇā experiment yields different number of śruti-s for different 
intervallic configurations (swara arrangements)…” [Komaragiri, pp. 140]. 
According to this research the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment is not 
relevant for contemporary music as changing intervals does not always 
yield twenty two shrutis. This is true mainly because today’s swara
positions are different from those of Bharata and there is no clarity about 
various theories of shruti. It also shows that in recent times some 
researchers such as Mr. Komaragiri [Komaragiri, pp. 140, 2010], are 
becoming aware that distribution of unequal shrutis among seven swaras
of contemporary musical scale is not viable but somehow they missed the 
unique possibility of equal temperament distribution of shrutis among 
seven swaras. As a result they started arguing that Bharata’s paradigm of
twenty two shruti is not applicable to contemporary music. There exists a 
debate about the contemporary scales as discussed somewhere else in 
this monograph, still apart from that many researchers have come up with 
varied proposals/ models to show that their theories represent Bharata’s 
paradigm correctly. So it was thought that the comparative analysis of 
some of these theories in the context of `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment 
will be good idea. For comparative analysis models developed by Mr. 
Acharekar, Acharya Brihaspati, and Dr. Vidyadhar Oak are referred. 
Similarly Pythagorean scale of twenty two microtones is also referred as a 
hypothetical model since there is no un-disputed reference available. All 
these models are compared with Bharata’s equal temperament scale. 
Advanced technology is very useful for simulating these theoretical 
models on computers. Therefore shrutis are generated on computers 
using the above-mentioned models. It is also possible to simulate `ShrutiNidarshanam’ experiment on the computers. Since Bharata uses this 
experiment to demonstrate shrutis on two Veenas in a certain and definite 
way therefore the Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment is simulated on 
computers and then tested all the above-mentioned models and compared 
the results. 
90 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
7.2 Simulating Shrutis
Both the experiments, by Bharata and Sharangadeva, of demonstrating 
twenty two shrutis are highly elegant and precise as discussed earlier. 
This leads to the stronger argument in favor of the equal temperament 
twenty two shrutis. With the use of computational technology now it is 
possible to simulate `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment on the computer 
and it can be demonstrated that there exists only one case of shruti
distribution among seven swaras and that is equi-distanced distribution. 
Any other ratios or combination of distribution will lead to extra shrutis or 
less shrutis. The four-step `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment follows a 
mapping process and at every step, all seven swaras of Chala Veena are 
displaced by one shruti. Unless, shrutis are equi-distanced, they will not 
map exactly on the seven shrutis of Achala Veena. If they are non-equal 
distanced then they will map un-evenly on the Achala Veena and generate 
extra places or extra shrutis. Thus the `shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment 
happens to be highly accurate and very intelligently designed experiment. 
As per the computational simulation of this experiment following are the 
results that show clearly that ancient shrutis were equi-distanced and 
therefore, Bharata’s scale was that of equal temperament twenty two 
shruti scale. Author of the present monograph is working on 
computational Indian music for quite some time and has developed these 
simulations for testing various models of shrutis. 
Simulation 1 
Saranas are as follows as per the description from Bharata’s Natyashastra
and Sangita Ratnakar of Sharangadeva (equal temperament Shrutis) 
Sarana Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 
Dhruva 
Veena 
240 263.79 280.94 318.68 361.48 397.32 423.16 
Chala 
Veena 
240 263.79 280.94 318.68 361.48 397.32 423.16 
1st
 232.55 255.60 272.23 308.79 350.27 384.99 410.03 
2nd 225.34 247.68 263.79 299.22 339.41 373.05 397.32 
3rd 218.35 240 255.60 289.94 328.88 361.48 384.99 
4th 211.58 232.55 247.68 280.94 318.68 350.27 373.05 
Table No. 2 
Number of shrutis generated is: 22 
Number of shrutis generated does not match with Bharata's 22 shrutis 
91 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Simulation 2 
Saranas are as follows as per the Pythagorean model (hypothetical) 
Sarana Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 
Dhruva 
Veena 
240 266.36 284.44 320 360 399.54 426.66 
Chala 
Veena 
240 266.36 284.44 320 360 399.54 426.66 
1st
 227.81 252.83 270 303.75 341.71 379.25 405 
2nd 225 240 256.28 288.32 324.36 360 384.43 
3rd 216.00 230.40 246.03 276.79 311.39 345.60 369.05 
4th 213.33 227.55 243.00 273.37 307.54 351.33 364.50 
Table No. 3 
Number of shrutis generated is: 31 
Number of shrutis generated does not match with Bharata's 22 shrutis
Simulation 3 
Saranas are as follows as per the model developed by Mr. Acharekar 
Sarana Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni 
Dhruva 
Veena 
270 300 320 360 405 450 480 
Chala 
Veena 
270 300 320 360 405 450 480 
1st
 266.66 296.29 316.04 355.55 400 444.44 474.07 
2nd 253.16 281.29 300.04 337.55 379.74 421.94 450.07 
3rd 243.00 270.00 288.00 324.00 364.91 405.01 432.01 
4th 240.00 266.67 284.45 320.00 360.01 400.01 426.67 
Table No. 4 
Number of shrutis generated is: 26 
Number of shrutis generated does not match with Bharata's 22 shrutis
92 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Simulation 4 
Saranas are as follows as per the theory developed by Acharya Brihaspati 
Sarana Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa 
Dhruva 
Veena 
266.66 284.44 320 360 400 426.66 480 
Chala 
Veena 
266.66 284.44 320 360 400 426.66 480 
1st
 263.37 280.93 316.04 355.55 395.06 421.39 474.07 
2nd 250.00 266.66 300.00 337.50 375.00 400.00 450.00 
3rd 240 256 288 324.00 360 384.00 432.00 
4th 237.03 252.83 284.44 320.00 355.55 379.25 426.66 
Table No. 5 
Number of shrutis generated is: 26 
Number of shrutis generated does not match with Bharata's 22 shrutis
Simulation 5 
Saranas for shruti theory developed by Dr. Vidyadhar Oak 
Sarana Re Ga Ma Pa Dha Ni Sa 
Dhruva 
Veena 
269.99 299.99 319.99 359.99 404.99 449.99 480/2
40 
Chala 
Veena 
269.99 299.99 319.99 359.99 404.99 449.99 480/2
40 
1st
 266.66 296.29 316.04 355.55 399.99 444.44 237.03 
2nd 256 284.44 303.40 341.33 384.00 426.66 227.55 
3rd 252.83 280.93 299.66 337.11 379.25 421.39 224.74 
4th 240.00 266.66 284.44 320.00 360.00 400.00 213.33 
Table No. 6 
Number of shrutis generated is: 28 
Number of shrutis generated does not match with Bharata's 22 shrutis
It is very clear from the above tables that number of shrutis mapped by 
Pythagorean model is 31, Mr. Acharekar’s model and Acharya Brihaspati’s 
models map 26 shrutis each while Dr. Vidyadhar Oak’s model generates 
and maps 28 shrutis when `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment is simulated 
on the computer using these models. Only Bharata’s model maps and 
93 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
generates exact 22 shrutis in the simulation. Above-mentioned tables are 
representative tables that show that if the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’
experiment generates extra shrutis, if shrutis are considered unequal. 
There exists only one possibility of equal temperament shrutis where the 
`Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment generates twenty two shrutis exactly. It’s 
a confirmatory proof of the equal temperament shrutis of Bharata. The 
Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment generates twenty two shrutis if and only 
if the shrutis are aurally equi-distanced. For any other ratios or any other 
non-equal distances number of shrutis will be either more than twenty 
two or less than twenty two shrutis. Therefore, there exists consistency, 
soundness in the results of Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment, cyclical 
generation of shrutis and equal temperament twenty two shrutis. 
Contemporary Indian musicologists hesitate to accept the paradigm of 
equal temperament shrutis because it does not match with the so-called 
just intonation scale as well as mathematically calculated consonances as 
earlier discussed. However, if we compare the contemporary twelve note 
equal temperament scale with the just intonations scale, then we realize 
they also do not match. There exists a significant mis-match which 
musicians `feel’ or experience but it is considered as within the acceptable 
limits. If the same logic is followed then the following comparison can 
prove that the mis-match between Bharata’s twenty two shruti equal 
temperament scale and just intonation scale is also within the acceptable 
limits. 
7.3 Comparative Facts: Bharata’s Shrutis and 
Contemporary Practices 
All the following values of various swaras and ratios are calculated 
considering the base frequency of Shadja swara as 240 Hertz. 
 The correct value of Bharata's Pramana Shruti is 
1.0320082797342096315932407419543, derived from the equal 
temperament 22 shruti scale. This value represents the correct 
interpretation of Natyashastra and Sangita Ratnakar and is valid 
in all respects. 
 Pramana Shruti ratio: 22nd root of 2 = 
94 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
1.0320082797342096315932407419543 - (1.032), this is the 
correct value of the Pramana Shruti of Bharata. 
 Logico-mathematical consonances and actual consonances 
generated by 22 shruti equal temperament scale by Bharata do 
not match. Logico-mathematical Shadja-Panchama Bhava is 
supposed to have the ratio of 3/2 i.e. 1.5, however, in Bharata's 
theory the ratio (value) of Shadja-Panchama Bhava happens to be 
1.506195553333333... (1.5062). 
 Logico-mathematical Shadja-Madhyama Bhava ratio is supposed 
to be 4/3 i.e. 1.333 however, in Bharata's scales value of ShadjaMadhyama Bhava happens to be 1.3278488279166... (1.3279). so 
that means there is a very minute difference between logical 
consonance and Bharata’s consonance. 
 Shadaj-Pancham-Bhava: 1.506195553333333... (1.5062). 
 Shadja-Madhyama-Bhava: 1.3278488279166... (1.3279). 
 Bharata's consonance tolerance ratio for Shadaj-Pancham Bhava
is: 1.506195553333333/ 1.5 = 1.0041304. 
 For contemporary twelve note equal temperament scale 
consonance tolerance ratio for Shadaj-Pancham Bhava is: 
1.5/1.498307076876 = 1.00112989. 
 Bharata's consonance tolerance ratio for Shadja-Madhyama 
Bhava is: 1.3333333/ 1.3278488279166 = 1.0041304. 
 For contemporary twelve note equal temperament scale 
consonance tolerance ratio for Shadja-Madhyama Bhava is: 
1.33483985417/1.3333333= 1.00112989 
 This shows that there is not much difference between the 
consonance tolerance ratio between the Bharata’s twenty-two 
shruti equal temperament scale and the contemporary twelve 
note equal temperament scale as compared to the logicomathematical consonance ratios. The tolerance difference is just 
0.003 between these two scales which actually does not matter 
much for musical experience. The way twelve note equal 
temperament scale is acceptable to common audience, the same 
way Bharata’s scale was also acceptable to audience during 
ancient times. Even today experts do not agree with Equal 
Temperament scale. 
 Bharata's shrutis are deviated from the logico-mathematical 
shrutis. Therefore, the difference ratio between mathematical 
value and Bharata's value can be considered as `Bharata's 
95 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Consonance Tolerance Ratio' (BCTR). Bharata's Consonance 
Tolerance Ratio (BCTR): 1.0041304. 
 The maximum difference is between Chatushruti Rishabha i.e. 
mathematical value is 270 and Bharata's value is 272.2350053. 
Therefore, Bharata's Maximum Consonance Tolerance Ratio 
(BMCTR): 
272.2350053/270=1.00827779740. Approximately BCTR is 
1.00828. 
 Similarly, the maximum difference with just intonation scale is
between Gandhara-Ga i.e. mathematical value is 300 hertz and 
Equal temperament scale value is 302.3810519748. Therefore, 
Equal temperament Scale’s Maximum Consonance Tolerance 
Ratio (ETMCTR): 
302.3810519748/300=1.007936839916. Approximately BCTR is 
1.008. 
For Bharata’s scale the maximum tolerance ratio is for Chatushruti 
Rishabha which is approx. 1.00828 while for Equal temperament twelve 
tone scale that is in use presently has a maximum tolerance ratio for the 
Gandhara swara as compared with mathematical value which comes 
about 1.008 as mentioned above. Thus the contemporary audience is 
comfortable with 1.008 tolerance value of the contemporary equal 
temperament scale and therefore there should not be any problem for 
accepting Bharata’s Chatushruti Rishabha since it has also the same value. 
Even contemporary musicians are aware that Gandhara swara of twelve 
note equi-tempered scale does not match with the Gandhara of just 
intonation scale and they make adjustment through various musical 
means such as modulation if required. Many vocalists prefer customized 
harmoniums for accompaniment. Gandhara is an important swara. In the 
case of Bharata’s twenty two shruti equal temperament scale Antara 
Gandhara matches with the Gandhara of just intonation scale. However, 
Chatuh-shruti Rishabha does not match with Rishabha of just intonation 
scale (That’s why probably Chatuh-shruti Rishabha was not a very 
important swara in Bharata’s system. Relatively Rishabha is less 
important swara as compared to Gandhara). So Bharata’s scale does 
justice to Gandhara scarifying on Rishabha. This is the case of acceptance 
96 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
of maximum difference in the consonance ratios. Other swaras and shrutis
of Bharata’s scale do not match exactly with just intonation swaras but 
there are minor differences and therefore not necessary to discuss in 
details here since the detailed discussion on these cases will also yield the 
similar conclusions. 
Bharata’s twenty two shruti equal temperament scale has many virtues. 
The worth discussing among them is that the Bharata’s scale happens to 
be the best way to eliminate Pythagorean comma. Pythagorean comma is 
a major issue of debate in the Western music. Comma means an error. 
When one tries to generate swaras by applying Shadja-Madhyama Bhava
and Shadja-Panchama Bhava in a cyclical manner to Shadja swara it 
generates infinite series of frequency values. The cyclical process never 
completes. In other words the Pythagorean comma results from the `circle 
of fifths’. For instance when the Shadja swara frequency value is 
multiplied by the ratio 3/2 (rule of fifth) repeatedly, the resulting swaras
would be as follows. Sa - Pa - Re - Dha - Ga - Ni - Teevra Ma and will never 
result in an in-tune octave (2/1). Similarly if swara Sa is multiplied by 4/3 
(inverse rule of fifth) then Sa-Pa - Re - Dha - Ga – Ni - Teevra Ma (all lower 
swaras) and they will never reach the lower octave in-tune (1/ 0.5). This is 
the simple example of the Pythagorean tuning problem. Ideally, in both 
the above-mentioned cyclical calculations the resultant cyclical swara and 
the in-tune octave should meet but it never happens. There is a
`difference’ between the resultant swara at the end of the cycle, and the 
desired `in-tune’ octave value of swara Sa. This is called Pythagorean 
comma. This is considered as an error in tuning. The rule of fifth is 
considered as universal rule of consonance and represented by the ratio 
of 3/2. This precise mathematical ratio is the root cause of Pythagorean 
comma. In Bharata’s scheme rule of fifth or the Shadja-Panchama Bhava is 
not defined by mathematical ratio. It is defined by sensitivity of ears and 
therefore it is purely aural ratio. In Bharata’s scale, aurally defined rule of 
fifth (Shadja-Panchama Bhava) has different mathematical value as 
discussed as follows. 
Bharata’s scale results into following ratios of Shadaj-Pancham Bhava and 
Shadja-Madhyama Bhava as: 
Shadaj-Pancham-Bhava: 1.506195553333333... (1.5062) as against the 
universally accepted value of rule of fifth that is 1.5 or the ratio of 3/2. The 
difference is just 0.0062 but it has an impact in eliminating Pythagorean 
comma. 
97 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Shadja-Madhyama Bhava: 1.3278488279166... (1.3279) as against the 
universally accepted value of inverse rule of fifth that is 1.3333... Or the 
ratio of 4/3.The difference is just 0.0054 but it has an impact in 
eliminating Pythagorean comma. 
If shrutis are generated by cyclical method, by using Bharata’s values of
Shadja-Panchama Bhava and Shadja-Madhyama Bhava with above values 
then Pythagorean comma is eliminated completely after twenty one 
cycles. Also after ten cycles shrutis start repeating with minor decimal 
point variation. Actually, after ten cycles itself the Pythagorean comma is 
partially eliminated. Bharata’s equal temperament scale of twenty two 
shrutis is thus the most efficient and elegant solution to eliminate 
Pythagorean comma. Pythagorean approach leads to an error of tuning at 
the end of an octave while Bharata approach accepts an error of 0.0062 at 
every cycle of the rule of fifth. The value of the displacement of a shruti
position is so minimal that by and large it does not have any major impact. 
This may be termed as Bharata’s comma. Here the objective is not to plead 
for Bharata’s equal temperament scale but to show that even Bharata’s 
scale is not a `perfect’ scale. However since it resolves the issue of 
Pythagorean comma to a great extent it may be considered as the best 
possible solution for the issues related to shrutis. 
 
98 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
99 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
8. A COMPREHENSIVE FRAME-WORK 
8.1 `Shruti Punja’ or `Shruti Megha’ Model (A cluster or 
cloud of microtones) 
As it is already discussed the concept of shruti in Indian music has evolved 
in various phases from Naradiya Shiksha to Bharata. The present 
monograph conclusively asserts that the Bharata’s paradigm of equal 
temperament twenty two shrutis was a robust frame-work followed till 
the time of Sharangadeva. From the mediaeval period to modern times 
due to loss of knowledge and probably due to loss of scholastic lineage 
there was no clarity about Bharata’s paradigm though there was great 
regard for Bharata’s paradigm. Till today musicologists and scholars are 
debating about the exact interpretation of Bharata’s paradigm. Secondly, 
due to the influence of just intonation scale and logico-mathematical 
models of musical scales scholars are perplexed about the exact nature of 
shrutis (irrespective of Bharata’s paradigm). They are in search of a framework that will justify latest understanding of shrutis or microtones. There 
is lot of data available in this regard. The data comes from various sources. 
Researchers probing from scientific perspective are trying to collect data 
of actual musical performance using available means, devices and 
technology. Others are using technology to correlate technology generated 
data with actual musical practices. The third approach is to look at shrutis
as harmonics and overtones and arrive at some results. Some other 
scholars are trying to rely on purely logical models of shrutis. Efforts are 
being made from all directions but satisfactory solution is not in sight. All 
the above-mentioned attempts are trying to prove either Bharata’s 
paradigm with their interpretation or Pythagorean or just intonation 
models. Very few researchers are probing the third path- a completely 
new frame-work. Researchers who are probing for new frame-work 
genuinely want to capture the phenomenon of microtones but an 
agreeable model is not emerging. The author of the present monograph is 
of the view that such a frame-work is not possible because the kind of 
100 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
mathematical precision that is expected in such a frame-work is
practically not warranted. Secondly considering psycho-acoustic aspects 
of musical experience as discussed earlier, such a logico-scientific framework will not be practically implementable. The contemporary twelvetone equal temperament scale is acceptable to the musical audience 
though not mathematically precise. It also does not capture many 
musically pleasing places within an octave. Still the twelve tone equal 
temperament scale is acceptable and appreciable to musicians as well as 
audience because there are certain reasons. Equal temperament scale 
provides opportunity for chord-based harmonic music. Also it provides 
more operational flexibility for instrumentalists. Looking at all these 
advantages it seems the solution for the problem of microtones would be 
a paradigm of equal temperament shrutis. So there is a need of an equal 
temperament scale that can capture wide range of aesthetically pleasing 
microtonal places in an octave and opens of possibilities for wide-ranging 
musical exploration. Therefore, paradigm of equal temperament shrutis or 
microtones is the most pragmatic and workable solution to the problem of 
shrutis or microtones. Bharata’s paradigm is a strong contender for the 
solution. However, in last two centuries there has been a big debate about 
exact interpretation of Bharata’s paradigm. The present monograph 
argues with strong evidence from the textual analysis of Bharata’s 
Natyashastra and the description of Shruti-Nidarshanam experiment and 
proves that Bharata’s twenty two shrutis were with equal temperament. 
As it stands Bharata’s paradigm is sufficient enough to capture most of the 
musically pleasing microtones in an octave. Bharata’s frame-work of 
shrutis provides a uniform base for all such microtones (though not with 
mathematical precision). It covers Vedic practices as well as modern 
practices. To further fine- tune Bharata’s paradigm, it is possible to divide 
each shruti into five sub-divisions to do justice to five types of shrutis
mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha. Even this fine-tuning should be with equal 
temperament. Therefore, a frame-work of hundred and ten shrutis/ 
microtones is developed that can address most of the traditional issues as 
well as contemporary issues related to shrutis/ microtones. For all 
practical purposes and musical performances Bharata’s scale is sufficient 
enough to do justice to all required shrutis/ microtones. However, framework of hundred and ten shrutis can bring in further fine-tuning. With the 
help of computational technology, to certain extent, it is possible to 
develop a technology that uses hundred and ten shrutis and with 
appropriate algorithm can compute the desired microtones suitable for a 
particular musical rendering. This frame-work can be a handy tool for 
101 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
such a computation. This can be a promising area of further research and 
development in computational music. 
A table of twenty two shrutis with total hundred and ten places is 
developed here. Each shruti has five subtle equi-distanced tonal 
variations. As mentioned elsewhere, mathematical precision is ideally 
desirable but cannot be implemented practically in a musical composition. 
Therefore, the Bharata’s equi-distanced twenty two shrutis is the most 
workable solution to the problem of shrutis. Moreover, it has certain 
musical advantages such as flexible octave, possibility of playing chords, 
exploring new musical spaces and most importantly resolves the issue of 
Pythagorean comma. Taking one step further here a frame-work is
developed as follows. Bharata’s equal temperament twenty two shrutis are 
taken as the base. Each of the shruti is divided into five places so there are 
hundred and ten positions in an octave. All the positions are equidistanced. So as a result an octave is divided into hundred and ten 
musically equal divisions and mapped within twenty two shruti positions. 
Following the scheme of Naradiya Shiksha-Mrudu, Madhya and Aayata jati
positions are assigned appropriately as shown in the table, while Dipta, 
Karuna and `shruti-like swara’ positions are assumed as floating positions. 
Mrudu-Madhya, Madhya and Madhya-Aayata positions shown can be 
replaced by these Dipta, Karuna and `shruti-like swara’ positions 
depending on the context and the application of appropriate consonance 
in a rendering. When the consonances are employed the resultant value 
may not exactly match the frequency that is mentioned in the table. But it 
will be within the range of one of these frequencies whichever is closer. It 
is suggested that it is not practically possible to assume precise pitch 
position as a shruti. Instead a shruti may be defined as a cluster or cloud of 
all musically significant pitch positions around each of Bharata’s twenty 
two shrutis. Therefore each shruti is considered as a cluster. The shruti
itself is the center of the cluster and called Madhya shruti. Thus each of 
Bharata’s shruti or a cluster of such pitch positions may be called `shruti 
punja’ or `shruti megha’. 
The scheme of reconstruction of such clusters would be as follows. Every 
shruti will have Madhya as its own shruti jati by default. It will have two 
lower microtones as Mrudu-Madhya and Mrudu. Similarly it will have two 
higher microtones as Madhya-Aayata and Aayata. For operational 
simplicity these microtones would be equi-distanced. Mrudu jati is the 
lowest extreme of a shruti cluster and Aayata is the highest extreme of a 
shruti cluster. Mrudu-Madhya and Madhya-Aayata are closer to the center. 
102 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Mrudu-Madhya, Madhya and Madhya-Aayata would be considered as 
floating points since they can be replaced by Dipta, Karuna (or Shruti-like 
swaras as mentioned by Bhatta Shobhakara). The following table gives an 
idea about such a scheme of reconstructing clusters for shrutis. The table 
provides frequency values of all the hundred and ten microtones, shruti
names, shruti jatis and swara names. The table is self-explanatory. 
SN. Frequency 
in 
Hertz. 
Shruti
Names 
ShrutiJati 
Swara Names
4. 240 Chhandovati Madhya Shadja
 241.517 MadhyaAayata 
 243.043 Aayata
 244.579 Mrudu
 246.125 MruduMadhya 
5. 247.681 Dayavati Madhya Eka-shruti Rishabha
 249.247 MadhyaAayata 
 250.822 Aayata
 252.408 Mrudu
 254.003 MruduMadhya 
6. 255.609 Ranjani Madhya Dvi-shruti Komal Rishabha
 257.224 MadhyaAayata 
 258.850 Aayata
 260.487 Mrudu
 262.133 MruduMadhya 
7. 263.791 Raktika Madhya Tri-shruti Bharata’s Rishabha 
 265.457 MadhyaAayata 
 267.135 Aayata
 268.824 Mrudu
 270.523 MruduMadhya 
Shuddha Rishabha
103 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
8. 272.235 Roudri Madhya Chatuh shruti Rishabha
 273.954 MadhyaAayata 
 275.686 Aayata 
 277.428 Mrudu 
 279.182 MruduMadhya 
9. 280.948 Krodha Madhya Bharata’s Gandhara 
 282.723 MadhyaAayata 
 284.510 Aayata 
 286.308 Mrudu 
 288.118 MruduMadhya 
Komal Gandhara
10. 289.941 Vajrika Madhya Sadharana Gandhara 
 291.772 MadhyaAayata 
 293.616 Aayata 
 295.472 Mrudu 
 297.340 MruduMadhya 
11. 299.221 Prasarini Madhya Antar Gandhara/ Shuddha 
Gandhara 
 301.110 MadhyaAayata 
 303.014 Aayata 
 304.929 Mrudu 
 306.857 MruduMadhya 
12. 308.799 Priti Madhya 
 310.748 MadhyaAayata 
 312.712 Aayata 
 314.689 Mrudu 
 316.678 MruduMadhya 
13. 318.683 Marjani Madhya Bharata’s Madhyama
 320.694 MadhyaAayata 
Shuddha Madhyama
104 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 322.721 Aayata
 324.761 Mrudu
 326.816 MruduMadhya 
14. 328.884 Kshiti Madhya
 330.959 MadhyaAayata 
 333.051 Aayata
 335.156 Mrudu
 337.275 MruduMadhya 
15. 339.411 Rakta Madhya Prati- Madhyama 
 341.552 MadhyaAayata 
Teevra Madhyama
 343.711 Aayata
 345.883 Mrudu
 348.070 MruduMadhya 
16. 350.275 Sandipani Madhya Chyuta Panchama
 352.484 MadhyaAayata 
 354.712 Aayata
 356.954 Mrudu
 359.210 MruduMadhya 
Shuddha Panchama
17. 361.486 Aalapini Madhya Bharata’s Panchama
 363.766 MadhyaAayata 
 366.065 Aayata
 368.379 Mrudu
 370.708 MruduMadhya 
18. 373.057 Madanti Madhya 
 375.409 MadhyaAayata 
 377.782 Aayata
 380.170 Mrudu
 382.573 MruduMadhya 
105 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
19. 384.998 Rohini Madhya Dvi-shruti Komal Dhaivata 
 387.425 MadhyaAayata 
 389.874 Aayata 
 392.338 Mrudu 
 394.818 MruduMadhya 
20. 397.321 Ramya Madhya Tri-shruti Bharata’s Dhaivata 
 399.825 MadhyaAayata 
(Shuddha Dhaivata)
 402.352 Aayata 
 404.896 Mrudu Shuddha Dhaivata
 407.455 MruduMadhya 
21. 410.039 Ugra Madhya Chatuh-shruti Dhaivata
 412.622 MadhyaAayata 
 415.231 Aayata 
 417.855 Mrudu 
 420.497 MruduMadhya 
22. 423.163 Kshobhini Madhya Bharata’ Nishada
 425.829 MadhyaAayata 
(Komal Nishada)
 428.521 Aayata 
 431.230 Mrudu Komal Nishada
 433.955 MruduMadhya 
1. 436.708 Teevra Madhya Kaishiki Nishada 
 439.459 MadhyaAayata 
 442.237 Aayata 
 445.032 Mrudu 
 447.845 MruduMadhya 
2. 450.686 Kumudvati Madhya Kakali Nishada/ Shuddha 
Nishada 
 453.525 MadhyaAayata 
106 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 456.391 Aayata
 459.276 Mrudu
 462.179 MruduMadhya 
3. 465.112 Manda Madhya Chyuta-Shadja
 468.041 MadhyaAayata 
 470.999 Aayata
 473.976 Mrudu
 476.972 MruduMadhya 
4. 480 Chhandovati Madhya Tara Shadja 
Table No. 7 
The exact position of Dipta and Karuna shruti can be calculated using the 
logic of `swarantara’ or consonance as mentioned by Bhatta Shobhakara. 
By applying these consonances Dipta shruti can be inferred. Similarly, he 
also talks about Shadja-Madhyama consonance and Shadja-Panchama 
consonance for deciding about Mrudu and Karuna shruti respectively. By 
this logic Madhyama swara always will have Mrudu shruti jati and 
Panchama will always have Karuna shruti jati. There exists a difference 
between Bharata’s Shadja-Madhyama Bhava and the Shadja-Madhyama 
consonance that we accept today since Bharata’s shrutis were equidistanced. Similarly, there exists difference between Bharata’s ShadjaPanchama Bhava and the Shadja-Panchama consonance that we accept 
today. So by applying today’s consonances we get today’s positions of 
Madhyama and Panchama. When we apply Bharata’s Shadja-Madhyama 
Bhava we get the position that is lower than the Madhya position and 
therefore it is Mrudu-Madhya jati. Similarly, when we apply Bharata’s 
Shadja-Panchama Bhava we get the position that is higher than the 
Madhya position and therefore it is a Madhya-Aayata position which is 
named as Karuna jati. Since in both the cases the actual consonance leads 
to pleasing swara position it should be called Dipta jati. So Dipta shruti jati
for Madhyama swara is higher than Bharata’s Madhyama swara and Dipta 
jati for Panchama is lower than Bharata’s Panchama. Both of them are the 
actual pleasing consonant positions of swaras. This certainly throws light 
on the scheme of shruti elaborately discussed in Naradiya Shiksha and 
further elaborated by Bhatta Shobhakara. For a shruti-like swara position 
Bhatta Shobhakara does not give any clear instructions. However, by 
applying rules of swarantaras described by Bhatta Shobhakara 
107 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
appropriate pitch positions can be decided (can be computed for a 
computational system) depending on context of rendering. 
The following table shows the possibility of employing Dipta/ Karuna 
shruti jatis if Shadja is fixed. In that case using consonances, location of 
Dipta and Karuna can be decided in the region of Mrudu-Madhya, Madhya 
or Madhya-Aayata places. This is just one hypothetical case of 
implementing shruti jatis. However in actual rendering depending on the 
context appropriate consonances can be used and Dipta, Karuna or shrutilike swaras can be rendered. Actually there is not much dispute about the 
positions of Mrudu, Madhya and Aayata shruti jatis. Their positions are 
definitively fixed as shown in the previous table. The real issue arises 
about the positions of Dipta and Karuna shruti jatis. Therefore it is 
recommended that the logico-mathematical values of the consonances or 
Bhavas should be considered for deciding the position of a Dipta shruti 
jati. The position of a Karuna shruti jati is decided by Bharata’s ShadjaPanchama Bhava and so it will be slightly higher than the logicomathematical Shadja-Panchama Bhava. 
The following table is just suggestive and not a prescriptive table. The 
table shows frequencies of hundred and ten microtones, shruti names, and 
shruti jatis, special cases of Dipta and / or Karuna etc. and finally swara
names. 
SN. Frequency Shruti
Names 
ShrutiJati 
Dipta/ 
Karuna etc. 
Swara
Names 
 473.976 
(236.988) 
Mrudu 237 Mrudu
 476.972 
(238.486) 
MruduMadhya 
4. 240 Chhandovati Madhya 240 Dipta Shadja
 241.517 MadhyaAayata 
 243.043 Aayata 243.75Aayata
 244.579 Mrudu 
 246.125 MruduMadhya 
5. 247.681 Dayavati Madhya 247.5 Dipta
 249.247 MadhyaAayata 
108 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 250.822 Aayata
 252.408 Mrudu
 254.003 MruduMadhya 
253.12 Dipta
6. 255.609 Ranjani Madhya 256 Dipta Komal 
Rishabha 
 257.224 MadhyaAayata 
 258.850 Aayata
 260.487 Mrudu
 262.133 MruduMadhya 
261.8 Dipta
7. 263.791 Raktika Madhya Madhya Bharata’s 
Rishabha 
 265.457 MadhyaAayata 
 267.135 Aayata 266.6 Aayata
 268.824 Mrudu
 270.523 MruduMadhya 
270 Dipta Shuddha 
Rishabha 
8. 272.235 Roudri Madhya Madhya Chatuh 
shruti 
Rishabha 
 273.954 MadhyaAayata 
274.28
Karuna 
 275.686 Aayata
 277.428 Mrudu
 279.182 MruduMadhya 
9. 280.948 Krodha Madhya 280 Dipta Bharata’s 
Gandhara 
 282.723 MadhyaAayata 
 284.510 Aayata 284Aayata
 286.308 Mrudu
 288.118 MruduMadhya 
288 Dipta Komal 
Gandhara 
10. 289.941 Vajrika Madhya Karuna Sadharana 
Gandhara 
109 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
 291.772 MadhyaAayata 
 293.616 Aayata 292.7 Aayata
 295.472 Mrudu 296.4Mrudu
 297.340 MruduMadhya 
11. 299.221 Prasarini Madhya 300 Dipta Antar 
Gandhara/ 
Shuddha 
Gandhara 
 301.110 MadhyaAayata 
 303.014 Aayata 303.75
Aayata 
 304.929 Mrudu 
 306.857 MruduMadhya 
12. 308.799 Priti Madhya Madhya
 310.748 MadhyaAayata 
 312.712 Aayata 
 314.689 Mrudu 
 316.678 MruduMadhya 
316 Mrudu MruduBhuta 
Madhyama 
13. 318.683 Marjani Madhya Madhya Bharata’s 
Madhyama 
 320.694 MadhyaAayata 
320 Dipta Shuddha 
Madhyama 
 322.721 Aayata 
 324.761 Mrudu 324 Mrudu
 326.814 MruduMadhya 
14. 328.884 Kshiti Madhya Madhya
 330.959 MadhyaAayata 
330 Dipta
 333.051 Aayata 
 335.156 Mrudu 
 337.275 Mrudu- 337.5 Dipta
110 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Madhya
15. 339.411 Rakta Madhya Madhya Prati 
Madhyama 
 341.552 MadhyaAayata 
341.3Karuna Teevra 
Madhyama 
 343.711 Aayata
 345.883 Mrudu
 348.070 MruduMadhya 
16. 350.275 Sandipani Madhya 349.09
Madhya 
Chyuta 
Panchama 
 352.484 MadhyaAayata 
 354.712 Aayata 355.5 Aayata
 356.954 Mrudu
 359.210 MruduMadhya 
360 Dipta Shuddha 
Panchama 
17. 361.486 Aalapini Madhya 361.6 Karuna Bharata’s 
Panchama 
 363.766 MadhyaAayata 
 366.065 Aayata 365.6 Aayata
 368.379 Mrudu
 370.708 MruduMadhya 
371.25 Dipta
18. 373.057 Madanti Madhya Madhya
 375.409 MadhyaAayata 
 377.782 Aayata
 380.170 Mrudu 379.6Mrudu
 382.573 MruduMadhya 
19. 384.998 Rohini Madhya 384 Dipta Komal 
Dhaivata 
 387.425 MadhyaAayata 
 389.874 Aayata
 392.338 Mrudu 392.7 Mrudu
 394.818 Mrudu-
111 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Madhya
20. 397.321 Ramya Madhya Madhya Bharata’s 
Dhaivata 
 399.825 MadhyaAayata 
400 Dipta (Shuddha 
Dhaivata) 
 402.352 Aayata 
 404.896 Mrudu 405 Dipta Shuddha 
Dhaivata 
 407.455 MruduMadhya 
21. 410.039 Ugra Madhya Madhya Chatuh 
shruti 
Dhaivata 
 412.622 MadhyaAayata 
411.4Dipta
 415.231 Aayata 
 417.855 Mrudu 
 420.497 MruduMadhya 
420 Dipta
22. 423.163 Kshobhini Madhya Karuna Bharata’ 
Nishada 
 425.829 MadhyaAayata 
426 Dipta (Komal 
Nishada) 
 428.521 Aayata 
 431.230 Mrudu 432Mrudu Komal 
Nishada 
 433.955 MruduMadhya 
1. 436.708 Teevra Madhya Madhya Kaishiki 
Nishada 
 439.459 MadhyaAayata 
 442.237 Aayata 
 445.032 Mrudu 444.4 Mrudu
 447.845 MruduMadhya 
2. 450.686 Kumudvati Madhya 450 Dipta Kakali 
Nishada/ 
Shuddha 
112 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Nishada
 453.525 MadhyaAayata 
 456.391 Aayata 455.6 Aayata
 459.276 Mrudu
 462.179 MruduMadhya 
3. 465.112 Manda Madhya 
(Mrudu) 
464 Dipta
 468.041 MadhyaAayata 
 470.999 Aayata
 473.976 Mrudu Mrudu
 476.972 MruduMadhya 
4. 480 Chhandovati Madhya 480 Dipta Tara Shadja 
Table No. 8 
The following table tries to summaries all the hundred and ten microtones 
in terms of swaras of Naradiya Shiksha. So the table shows Samavedic 
swara-names, their frequency values in Hertz, Bharata’s shrutis, shruti jatis
and finally Bharata’s swara names. 
Samaveda 
SwaraName 
Frequency Bharata’s
Shruti 
Shruti-Jati Bharata’s 
Swara Names 
473.976 
(236.988) 
Mrudu
476.972 
(238.486) 
Mrudu-Madhya
Chaturtha 240 Chhandovati Madhya (Dipta) Shadja
241.517 Madhya-Aayata
243.043 Aayata
260.487 Mrudu
262.133 Mrudu-Madhya
Tritiya 263.791 Raktika Madhya Bharata’s 
Rishabha 
265.457 Madhya-Aayata
113 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
267.135 Aayata
277.428 Mrudu
279.182 Mrudu-Madhya
Dwitiya 280.948 Krodha Madhya Bharata’s 
Gandhara 
282.723 Madhya-Aayata
284.510 Aayata
314.689 Mrudu
316.678 Mrudu-Madhya
Prathama 318.683 Marjani Madhya 
(Mrudu/ Dipta) 
Bharata’s 
Madhyama 
320.694 Madhya-Aayata
(Dipta) 
322.721 Aayata
356.954 Mrudu
359.210 Mrudu-Madhya
(Dipta) 
Krushta 361.486 Aalapini Madhya 
(Karuna) 
Bharata’s 
Panchama 
363.766 Madhya-Aayata
366.065 Aayata
392.338 Mrudu
394.818 Mrudu-Madhya
Atiswarya 397.321 Ramya Madhya(Mrudu) Bharata’s 
Dhaivata 
399.825 Madhya-Aayata
(Dipta) 
402.352 Aayata
417.855 Mrudu
420.497 Mrudu-Madhya
(Dipta) 
Mandra 423.163 Kshobhini Madhya 
(Karuna) 
Bharata’ 
Nishada 
425.829 Madhya-Aayata
428.521 Aayata
473.976 Mrudu
476.972 Mrudu-Madhya
Chaturtha 480 Chhandovati Madhya Tara Shadja 
Table No. 9 
114 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
8.2 Analysis and Discussion 
The recent experimental studies conducted provide evidence for flexible 
intonation as a statistical phenomenon in which the note densities occur 
not as exact points but rather as clusters within a certain tonal regions. 
[Rao, S., pp. 692-693]. In a performance musicians visualize a particular 
musical phrase with specific intonation on a particular swara depending 
on the melodic context of a Raga but a performer may not reach the 
specific point always. A performer reaches a tonal range in and around 
that specific point. This is described as a statistical phenomenon. In actual 
performance, the pitch values of swaras do not vary randomly. A 
performer has clear idea about the desired swara in mind however; the 
swara that is actually rendered may not fall on that particular point due to 
some musical and non-musical reasons. In principle it is possible to 
calculate and compute the exact position of a swara using computers but 
due to psycho-acoustic considerations of a musical experience such a 
precision is undesirable. The integrated frame-work anchored in the 
Bharata’s paradigm of equal temperament twenty two shrutis augmented 
with manifestation of five sonar qualities of a swara mentioned in 
Naradiya Shiksha can provide a theoretical as well as practical solution to
the problem of shrutis/ microtones. As already discussed this frame-work 
may be termed as a `Shruti-Megha’ frame-work or a `Shruti-Punja’ framework that captures the statistical phenomenon of flexible intonations. 
It is quite evident that Naradiya Shiksha does not prescribe equal 
temperament shrutis. On the other hand Bharata provides a robust framework of equal temperament shrutis preserving the Vedic pitch positions of 
Gandhara, Rishabha, Nishada and Dhaivata. After Vedic era few more pitch 
positions became prominent such as Antara-Gandhara and Kakali-Nishada
that Naradiya Shiksha also mentioned. Bharata tried to accommodate all of 
them. Bharata’s system could not do true justice to actual pitch positions 
of Chatuh-shruti Rishabha and Chatuh-shruti Dhaivata however they are a 
part of Bharata’s system. Even the so-called Prati-Madhyama or TeevraMadhyama is not mentioned by Bharata but that is also accommodated in 
Bharata’s system. Bharata’s system appears to be pragmatic solution to all 
the issues related to shrutis and swaras, though bit negotiated with 
mathematical precision of pitch positions. It is a dichotomy of ideal 
against pragmatic. Still the author of present monograph feels that 
Bharata’s paradigm is the best ever solution provided to address the 
issues related to shrutis. The `Shruti-Punja’ frame-work of equal 
temperament, hundred and ten shruti position in an octave could be a 
115 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
further enhancement of Bharata’s paradigm. As the current research 
argues, shrutis are statistical pitch states; this frame-work can provide
relatively more definitive structure which is closer to these statistical 
states. Naradiya Shiksha already provides a vocabulary for the same. 
In prevailing diverse perspectives on shrutis with contradictory theories it 
is necessary to develop some rational theoretical structure that addresses 
various issues. Bharata’s equal temperament shrutis is a well-established 
paradigm but modern scholars are not happy with it since it does not 
address the issue of precise shruti values of frequencies. Naradiya Shiksha 
gives a vital tool to classify shrutis into five categories but it became 
obsolete in Bharata’s days itself. Modern scholars no longer are familiar 
with it. Contemporary research is progressing on two lines apart from the 
logical models. The empirical research focuses on analyzing live 
performances or recordings of musical maestros and it is yielding some 
satisfactory results. A. K. Datta and others have done some important 
work in this regards. Their research proves the existence of twenty two 
shrutis or microtones in the actual performance of musical rendering of 
Ragas beyond doubt. They could successfully extract shrutis from the 
musical data. The extracted ratios are generally in good agreement with 
the ratios given by Deval and the Western sources according to them 
[Datta A. K., p. 7].This approach is significant because they have followed 
scientific methodology very rigorously. The second approach is to use 
computational technology to analyze musical data to arrive at some 
satisfactory conclusions. Such attempts are very few. There is a need of 
more a comprehensive approach that covers traditional theories as well 
as modern research. 
This paper attempts to rely on four types of data. The first data comes 
from the shruti values generated by all possible consonances. These 
include Shadja-Panchama Bhava, Shadja-Madhyama Bhava, and all the 
variations of Gandhara Bhava, Rishabha Bhava etc. These Bhavas are 
significant because it is widely accepted that these Bhavas have ability to 
generate pleasing musical notes. The other important data comes from the 
natural spectrum of harmonics/ overtones those are generated when 
various musical notes are played. Computational analysis shows that 
these values/ overtones around 80 to 100 cycles saturate at certain 
frequency values. Such values are identified. This data is again very 
valuable because it helps in identifying clusters of frequencies that are 
significant from harmonic point of view. The third type of data is an 
empirical data by Dr. Sulabha Thakar who is a traditionally trained 
116 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
musician. In an independent experiment, she attempted to identify 
significant frequencies in various Hindustani Ragas. Being a professionally 
trained vocalist of Kirana Gharana, which is known for its precision of 
swara rendering, her observations are considered reliable. She took help 
of a computer to generate specific shruti frequencies in a particular Raga
and verified it. She could identify around twenty seven such shruti values 
in an octave which are employed by practicing musicians in their 
performance. The fourth type of data comes from an objective analysis of 
shrutis from the ‘aalaaps’ (or the elaborate renderings of a Raga-specific 
phrases in the beginning) from hundred and fifty Bandishs or songs 
performed by fifty three eminent musicians and scholars covering twenty 
one different Ragas. The total time of singing analyzed is nearly eight and 
half hours. The audio samples are taken from recorded performances 
[Datta A. K., p. 1].This data is very important. However, one interesting 
observation about these data is that all the identified shrutis appear to be 
influenced by the contemporary equal temperament twelve tone scale. A 
glance at the data suggests that there are pairs of shrutis which are located 
around the major swaras of twelve tone scale that is in use in 
contemporary music. For instance, R1- 251.21 and R2- 256.98 are around 
Komal Rishabha-254.27; R3- 266.68 and R4-272.32 are around Rishabha269.39; G1- 281.54 and G2- 289.33 are around Komal Gandhara-285.40; 
G3- 298.41 and G4-305.07 are around Gandhara- 302.38; M1- 316 and 
M2- 323.66 are located around Madhyama- 320.36; M3- 335.67 and M4- 
342.72 are around Teevra Madhyama- 339.41; P1- 354.15 and P2- 362.40 
are located around Panchama: 359.59and so on and so forth. It also 
suggests that contemporary equal temperament musical scale has strong 
enough impact on learning process of musicians, their performance as 
well as appreciation. Thus Datta et al have identified twenty two 
microtones around the twelve notes of (equal temperament?) scale 
therefore total number of tones used in actual performance becomes 
thirty four. In a sense one can say that present day musicians use thirty 
four shrutis in their music. However, Datta et al have given the ratios for
twenty two shrutis. They have not given the ratios for the swaras used in 
the performance so it cannot be confirmed that they have used the equal 
temperament scale or not. Another interesting and valuable inference that 
can be drawn from this data is that none of the shrutis from this data 
match with the just intonation values. So this data can prove that just 
intonation scale is not an empirical scale- it is just a logico-mathematical 
scale. 
117 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
The following table captures hundred and ten equal temperament 
frequency values in an octave and distributes them in equal temperament 
twenty two shrutis mentioned by Bharata. Thus each shruti has four 
variations- two on lower side and two on upper side. The middle value is 
the shruti value itself which is called Madhya shruti. The lowest value is 
called Mrudu shruti. In-between value is called Mrudu-Madhya shruti. On 
the other side, the most upper value is termed as Aayata shruti. The inbetween is called Madhya-Aayata shruti. The frequency values generated 
by various consonances, frequency values generated by harmonics and 
overtones and the shruti frequency values identified by Dr. Sulabha 
Thakar and Datta et al are then arranged in the table as per their 
proximity to these hundred and ten values. This helps in comparing 
various values and aligning them with Mrudu, Mrudu-Madhya, Madhya, 
Madhya-Aayata, and Aayata categories. As earlier mentioned, Dipta and 
Karuna shruti jatis are the floating jatis. This arrangement helps in 
defining criteria for Dipta and Karuna shruti jatis. Comparative table of 
twenty two shrutis- equal temperament frequencies, select consonant 
frequencies, Tanapura overtones, empirical data by Dr. Sulabha Thakar 
and shrutis by Datta et al is as follows. Prof. A. K. Datta et al have given 
ratios of shrutis in their monograph. Based on these ratios the values are 
calculated and mentioned in the last column of the table. They have not 
provided the ratios of swaras used and therefore values for swaras are not 
added here. 
SN. Frequency 
Shruti 22 
Shruti 
Names 
ShrutiJati 
Freq. 
by 
Bhava
Freq. 
Tanapura
Overtones 
Freq. 
Thakar 
Sulabha 
Freq. 
Datta 
et al 
 473.976 
(236.984) 
 Mrudu 
 476.972 
(238.486) 
 MruduMadhya 
 
4. 240 Chhandov
ati 
Madhya 240 240 240 240 
 241.517 MadhyaAayata 
 
 243.043 Aayata 243.75 243.75 243 
 244.579 Mrudu 
 246.125 MruduMadhya 
 246 
5. 247.681 Dayavati Madhya 247.5 247.5 
 249.247 MadhyaAayata 
 249.11 
 250.822 Aayata 251.25 251.21 
 252.408 Mrudu 
118 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 254.003 MruduMadhya 
253.12
5 
253.125 
6. 255.609 Ranjani Madhya 256 255 
 257.224 MadhyaAayata 
 256.98 
 258.850 Aayata 258.75 
 260.487 Mrudu 
 262.133 MruduMadhya 
261.8 262.5 261.8 
7. 263.791 Raktika Madhya 
 265.457 MadhyaAayata 
 265.7 
 267.135 Aayata 266.66 266.66 266.68 
 268.824 Mrudu 
 270.523 MruduMadhya 
270 270 
8. 272.235 Roudri Madhya 272.32 
 273.954 MadhyaAayata 
274.28 273.7 
 275.686 Aayata 275.6 275.14 
 277.428 Mrudu 277.5 
 279.182 MruduMadhya 
 278.58 
9. 280.948 Krodha Madhya 280 281.2 281.54 
 282.723 MadhyaAayata 
 282.06 
 284.510 Aayata 284.2 285 
 286.308 Mrudu 
 288.118 MruduMadhya 
288 288.7 
10. 289.941 Vajrika Madhya 289.15 289.33 
 291.772 MadhyaAayata 
 
 293.616 Aayata 292.5 292.77 
 295.472 Mrudu 295.3 
 297.340 MruduMadhya 
296.2 296.25 296.43 
11. 299.221 Prasarini Madhya 300 300 300.13 298.41 
 301.110 MadhyaAayata 
 
 303.014 Aayata 303.75 303.75 
 304.929 Mrudu 305.07 
 306.857 MruduMadhya 
 
12. 308.799 Priti Madhya 309.3 307.5 
 310.748 MadhyaAayata 
 
 312.712 Aayata 
 314.689 Mrudu 315 
119 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
 316.678 MruduMadhya 
316.04 316 
13. 318.683 Marjani Madhya 319.37 
 320.694 MadhyaAayata 
320 
 322.721 Aayata 322.5 
 324.761 Mrudu 324 323.66 
 326.814 MruduMadhya 
 
14. 328.884 Kshiti Madhya 
 330.959 MadhyaAayata 
330 330 331.49 
 333.051 Aayata 
 335.156 Mrudu 335.67 
 337.275 MruduMadhya 
337.5 337.5 
15. 339.411 Rakta Madhya 339.83 
 341.552 MadhyaAayata 
341.3 341.7 342.72 
 343.711 Aayata 344.08 
 345.883 Mrudu 345 
 348.070 MruduMadhya 
 
16. 350.275 Sandipani Madhya 349.09 
 352.484 MadhyaAayata 
 352.5 
 354.712 Aayata 355.5 354.43 354.15 
 356.954 Mrudu 
 359.210 MruduMadhya 
360 360 
17. 361.486 Aalapini Madhya 361.615 362.4 
 363.766 MadhyaAayata 
 
 366.065 Aayata 365.6 
 368.379 Mrudu 367.5 
 370.708 MruduMadhya 
371.25 370.74 
18. 373.057 Madanti Madhya 
 375.409 MadhyaAayata 
 375 375.34 
 377.782 Aayata 377.53 
 380.170 Mrudu 379.68 379.6 380.03 
 382.573 MruduMadhya 
 382.5 
19. 384.998 Rohini Madhya 384 
 387.425 MadhyaAayata 
 387.02 
 389.874 Aayata 390 389.59 
 392.338 Mrudu 392.72 393.7 
120 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 394.818 MruduMadhya 
 
20. 397.321 Ramya Madhya 397.5 
 399.825 MadhyaAayata 
400 399.39 400.27 
 402.352 Aayata 
 404.896 Mrudu 405 405 
 407.455 MruduMadhya 
 
21. 410.039 Ugra Madhya 411.4 410.21 
 412.622 MadhyaAayata 
 412.5/ 413.4 
 415.231 Aayata 
 417.855 Mrudu 
 420.497 MruduMadhya 
420 420 419.75 
22. 423.163 Kshobhini Madhya 421.8 422.05 
 425.829 MadhyaAayata 
426.3 424.99 
 428.521 Aayata 427.5 
 431.230 Mrudu 432 430.30 
 433.955 MruduMadhya 
 432.83 
1. 436.708 Teevra Madhya 435 
 439.459 MadhyaAayata 
 
 442.237 Aayata 442.5 
 445.032 Mrudu 444.4 
 447.845 MruduMadhya 
 446.64 448.56 
2. 450.686 Kumudvat
i 
Madhya 450 450 
 453.525 MadhyaAayata 
 
 456.391 Aayata 455.6 455.6/ 457.5 
 459.276 Mrudu 459.27 
 462.179 MruduMadhya 
 
3. 465.112 Manda Madhya 464.06 465 
 468.041 MadhyaAayata 
 
 470.999 Aayata 
 473.976 Mrudu 472.5 
 476.972 MruduMadhya 
 
4. 480 Chhandov
ati 
Madhya 480 481.208 480 
Table No. 10 
121 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
A glance at the table will unfold some interesting observations. 
1. Out of hundred and ten shruti values only seventy-nine shruti
values correspond with the consonant values, harmonic values 
and empirical values. It means that the rest of the thirty one 
values are not really required. It also means that seventy nine
values are potential microtones (shrutis) and in some or other 
context they can be used. This is a big number to implement in 
musical rendering. 
2. Microtonal values generated using consonances or Bhavas are 
important but these are the ideal values. By using primary Bhavas
such as Shadja-Panchama Bhava etc. secondary Bhavas such as 
Shadja-Gandhara Bhava etc. and other allied Bhavas such as 
Shadja-Rishabha Bhava etc. Thirty nine microtonal values are 
computationally generated in this monograph. Out of them, there
are twenty nine values that closely match with the proposed 
hundred and ten values. But these Bhavas are applied to 
contemporary- just intonation seven swaras. If these Bhavas are 
applied to Bharata’s seven swaras then the resultant values will 
be different. Therefore even this analysis is also indicative and 
not final. 
3. Apart from that, fifty two Tanapura harmonics with eighty cycles 
are computationally generated. Out of those thirty five values 
closely match with the proposed hundred and ten values. 
4. Dr. Sulabha Thakar could identify twenty seven shrutis in her 
monograph that are used in contemporary Ragas. Out of these 
seventeen shruti values closely match with the proposed hundred 
and ten values. 
5. From the set of twenty two values of Datta et al, all the values 
closely match with the proposed value set of hundred and ten 
values. But interestingly out of twenty two values of Datta et al 
eight values match exactly with Bharata’s values while seven 
values are very close to Bharata’s shrutis. It is worth noticing that 
Bharata’s Chatuh-shruti Rishabha, Bharata’s Gandhara, Sadharana 
Gandhara and Antara Gandhara, Panchama, Chatuh-shruti 
Dhaivata and Bharata’s Nishada match exactly with the respective 
shrutis. It may be considered as the conclusive proof of the 
existence of these swaras from Bharata’s equal temperament 
scale in the contemporary musical performance. Eight values 
from Datta et al list of shrutis do not match with Bharata’s equal 
temperament shrutis though. 
122 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
6. Over all there are thirty six values that closely match with at least 
two components from consonant values: harmonic values or 
empirical values. It means thirty six values are strong contenders 
for the status of shrutis. 
7. Bharata’s three shrutis do not match with any of these value-sets: 
consonant values, harmonic values or two sets of empirical 
values. But they miss the mapping by the difference of just two
hertz which is very negligible. So it can be argued that Bharata’s 
equal temperament twenty two shrutis have strong proximity 
with the above-mentioned four data-sets. The remaining values 
can be accommodated within the Shruti Punjas. 
This analysis is indicative and may not be treated as conclusive. It 
suggests possibilities for future research. As the more empirical data 
is collected and analyzed, the picture will be clear. It is certain that 
musical experience is a highly complex phenomenon. The equal 
temperament twenty two shrutis theory of Bharata is the best 
possible and pragmatic solution to the problem of shrutis. If it is 
augmented with the Shruti Punja or Shruti Megha model then it can be 
the most comprehensive solution to the problems of shrutis. 
 
123 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
This monograph concludes with five important insights about the concept 
of shruti in Indian music. Firstly, it provides clarity about the five types of 
shrutis mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha and their applications. Secondly, 
the monograph conclusively proves that Bharata’s octave has strong 
foundations in Vedic swaras that eventually resulted in twenty two shrutis. 
Thirdly, the monograph conclusively establishes Bharata’s paradigm of 
equal temperament twenty two shrutis with thorough analysis of 
Bharata’s original text from Natyashastra. Bharata’s `Shruti Nidarshanam’
experiment as thoroughly discussed is a conclusive proof of the equal 
temperament twenty two shrutis. This also tells a musician, how to 
establish shrutis on Veena and perceive them in a step-by-step manner. 
Fourthly, an attempt has been made to integrate Narada’s paradigm of 
shrutis with Bharata’s paradigm of shrutis. Each of Bharata’s shruti is 
considered as a cluster called Shruti-Punja or Shruti Megha. Every such 
cluster is divided into five types mentioned in Naradiya Shiksha to finetune Bharata’s paradigm. Finally, this monograph attempts to 
accommodate the latest findings of the empirical and computational 
research in the above-mentioned Shruti Punja model. 
Other important conclusions of this monograph are as follows. 
Bharata’s paradigm is completely different from Naradiya Shiksha. For 
Naradiya Shiksha, shrutis are sonar qualities of a Vedic swara while for 
Bharata shrutis are twenty two microtones or distinct places equally 
distributed (having equal temperament) across the octave. Thus shrutis
have physical existence and in modern times can be understood in terms 
of their frequency values. Shrutis are not merely mental concepts. Bharata 
gives highly sophisticated Shruti-Nidarshanam or Sarana-Chatushtaya
experiment to experience and demonstrate twenty two shruti that 
conclusively demonstrates the existence of equal temperament twenty 
124 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
two shrutis. The present monograph also developed a different variation 
of the Shruti Nidarshanam experiment as discussed. Computational 
simulation of the `Shruti-Nidarshanam’ experiment has helped to clarify 
many concepts more conclusively. It suggests that computational
approach towards musical research is worth exploring and fulfilling at the 
end. 
This monograph puts forth two types of arguments: a stronger or primary 
argument and few secondary arguments. The stronger argument is based 
on the critical analysis of Bharata’s original Sanskrit text from 
Natyashastra and then the analysis of the `Shruti Nidarshanam’
experiment as a confirmatory proof of equal temperament twenty two 
shrutis. This stronger argument is the crux of this monograph while other 
arguments are supplementary in nature. 
Apart from the stronger argument, this monograph provides a step-bystep method of establishing swaras in an octave (swara-sthapana or swara 
mandala sadhanam) based on the original text of Bharata. This was not 
attempted in any other earlier studies. This is another original 
contribution of this monograph. 
Computer simulation of `Shruti Nidarshanam’ experiment and further 
analysis help in re-establishing Bharata’s paradigm. This led to the 
development of a `Shruti-Punja’ or `Shruti-Megha’ frame-work of equal 
temperament hundred and ten microtones in an octave. 
This monograph attempted to argue that Bharata’s paradigm is very 
robust and highly relevant for Indian music in modern times. With the 
help of advanced computational technology it can help exploring newer 
possibilities to enrich Indian music. 

 
125 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Appendix 
Shruti Harmonium Key-Board 
Harmonium came to India around 1850 and became popular as an 
accompaniment instrument for popular and classical music. Indian 
musicians felt that this Western instrument is not quite suitable for 
classical music since subtle microtones or shrutis are not captured by 
harmonium. There had been many attempts in the past by musicologists 
such as K. B. Deval and G. B. Acharekar to develop a harmonium on which 
shrutis can be played [Rao, S., pp. 683-684]. They developed their own
theories of shrutis. But none of these theories of shrutis are based on 
Bharata’s description of shrutis in true sense. Therefore, there were many 
outstanding issues regarding the exact nature of shrutis and these theories 
could not solve these issues satisfactorily and thus these attempts were 
short-lived and did not get wider acceptance. However, there is no 
documented information available about the structure and construction of 
these harmoniums. It is said that on Acharekar’s harmonium one could 
play Western tempered scale as well as twenty-two-shruti Indian scale 
[Rao, S., p. 684]. In recent times also there have been many attempts of 
constructing a shruti harmonium but due to lack of authentic theoretical 
foundations these attempts also had limitation. In most of these so-called 
shruti harmonium designs they tried to preserve the twelve tone keyboard of Western tempered scale and by changing internal arrangements 
of the instrument they provided facility for playing shrutis (in a limited 
way). Major problem with these designs is that they tried to fit twenty two 
shrutis in twelve keys. So you cannot play Ragas having two or more 
varieties of shrutis of the same swara. Therefore a key-board design with 
twenty two keys in an octave is recommended here. Each key stands for 
one separate shruti in this key-board. So each octave has twenty two keys 
dedicated for twenty two shrutis. Following is a schematic sketch of a keyboard for an equal temperament twenty two shruti harmonium. This 
sketch is suggestive and with few simple extensions can be used to 
construct a shruti harmonium key-board. 
126 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Schematic structure of an equal temperament twenty two shruti keyboard 
designed by Dr. Vinod Vidwans 
127 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
Internal structure of reeds for the above-mentioned equal temperament 
twenty two Shruti Harmonium Keyboard designed by Dr. Vinod Vidwans. 
 
128 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
 
129 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music 
References 
Apte, Vaman S. (Ed.) (1970), The Student’s Sanskrit-English Dictionary, 
Published by Motilal Banarasidas, Delhi, 2nd revision 1970, 6th reprint 
1988 
Bharata (Date not known), Natyashastra of Bharatamuni, with the 
commentary- Abhinavabharati by Abhinava Guptacharya (Chapters 28-
37), Vol. IV, edited by Kavi, M. Ramakrishna and Pade, J. S., Baroda: 
Oriental Institute Baroda, 1964. 
Bhise, Usha R. (Ed.), (1986), Naradiya Shiksha, Original Commentary by 
Bhatta Shobhakara, critically edited with translation and explanatory 
notes in English by Dr. Usha R. Bhise, Poona: Bhandarakar Oriental 
Research Institute, Poona, India. 
Brihaspati, Acharya (1986), Natyashastra, 28th Chapter -Swaradhyaya, 
(Hindi) with Sanskrit and Hindi commentary, New Delhi: Brihaspati 
Publication. 
Datta, A. K. et al (2006), Objective Analysis of Shrutis from the Vocal 
Performances of Hindustani Music Using Clustering Algorithm, in the 
journal `Ninad’, Vol. 20, Kolkata: ITC Sangeet Research Academy.
Erlich, Paul (1998), Tuning, Tonality, and Twenty-Two-Tone Temperament,
originally published in Xenharmonikôn 17, An Informal Journal of 
Experimental Music, San Francisco: The Just Intonation Network, San 
Francisco, USA; revised in 2002. 
Kaundinyayan, Aamodavardhana et al (2013), Naradiya Shiksha, Critical 
Commentary, Translation and Explanation in Sanskrit and Hindi by 
Shivaraj Acharya Kaundinyayan, Varanasi: Chaukhamba vidyabhavana. 
Komaragiri, Madhu Mohan (2010), On the Applicability of the Ancient Śruti 
Scheme to the Current Fixed-Tonic, Variable-Interval Mēla System, in the 
Journal of the Madras Music Academy, Vol. 81, Chennai, India, pp. 135–
143. 
Narada (Date not known), Naradiya Shiksha, Original Commentary by 
Bhatta Shobhakara, Critical Commentary and Explanation in Sanskrit by 
Narayanaswami Dikshit, Edited by Satyavrat Sharma, Mysore: Rajakiya 
Shakha Mudranalaya, published in 1949. 
130 
The Doctrine of Shruti in Indian Music
Rao, Suvarna Lata, Meer Wim van der (2010), `The Construction, 
Reconstruction, and Deconstruction of Shruti’, Hindustani Music – 
Thirteenth to Twentieth Centuries, by Bor Joep et al (eds.), pp. 673-696, 
New Delhi: Manohar Publishers & Distributors. 
Sharangadeva, Nishshanka (13thc. AD), Sangita Ratnakar (original Sanskrit 
text), translated by Taralekar, G. H. (Marathi Trans.), Mumbai:
Maharashtra Rajya Sahitya Sanskriti Mandala, Published in 1975 
Thakar, Sulabha (2002), Bharatiya Sangita Shastra: Nava Anvayartha
(Marathi), Solapur: Suvidha Prakashan. 
